
In recent years, the world’s population living in cities has been rapidly increasing. Cities are
transforming their infrastructure in a smarter and more efficient way so that sustainable development
forms part of their long-term strategy. However, this transformation does not always result in
expected benefits due to a variety of factors such as an absence of social acceptance, a lack of holistic
design and the development of unilateral interventions. An analysis of the scientific literature related
to the evaluation of the impact of smart city actions revealed a gap in the holistic methods for their
assessment. To this end, an accurate evaluation of implemented smart solutions focusing on the
energy domain is necessary in order to assess the expected and realized impact of each solution.
This paper proposes a seven-step methodology for assessing the impact of smart city interventions
and presents a use case for the city of Espoo. A number of major findings were the outcome of our
research and development work, such as the need for a thorough analysis of the long-term vision of
the city, a combined top-down and bottom-up approach and the ongoing cooperation between all
stakeholders involved in urban planning and transformation, in which necessary Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) are defined.



Keywords: smart city impact assessment; sustainable urban development; smart city pilot; urban
transformation; positive energy districts; carbon-neutral cities

According to the United Nations 68% of the world’s population is projected to live
in urban areas by the year 2050; cities, therefore, are anticipated to face new challenges in
sustainably integrating further populace, such as a lack of appropriate infrastructure for
sustainable energy and automated systems, applications and commercial arrangements,
digital security, network connectivity and data capacity . Cities will be required to
transform their infrastructures in a smarter, more efficient and resilient way so that sustainable development forms part of their long-term strategy and a better quality of life
is assured to their citizens. The concept of the smart city is multidimensional , with
the aim of increasing urban sustainability and quality of life while pursuing economic
development among its citizens. Additionally, sustainability has gained popularity
among scholars, environmental policy makers and government agencies . However, a
smart city is not just about creating technically viable urban areas and stimulating economic
growth; it requires a multifaceted and multidimensional approach that promotes a structural transformation in the urban ecosystem, directing the development of cities towards
their “smartness” in areas such as economy, governance, social, environment, mobility and
ICT. According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), “the advantages of cities in
net-zero transitions vary greatly from one city to another, but they all have considerable



potential to turn national ambition into practice” . Additionally, the EU’s green agenda
for urban areas  promotes horizontal initiatives that develop common methods for the
evaluation and monitoring of smart city communities. To this end, our aim is to address
the smart city aspects related to sustainability and to define a methodology that any city
can adopt to contribute to its smart transformation, in line with the vision of the European
Commission.
 International Literature Review in Relation to Evaluation of Impact of Smart City
Interventions
The concept of the smart city has gained popularity in recent years. According to,
“smart city” and “digital city” are the most used terminologies in literature to indicate
the transformation of urban areas. The European Commission  defines a smart city as
“a place where traditional networks and services are made more efficient with the use of
digital and telecommunication technologies for the benefit of its inhabitants and business”.
There is a variety of domains that smart cities may comprise and interlink with; however,
there are commonalities existing among scholars and practitioners.
The Smart City Wheel by Boyd Cohen [12] (elaborated further in [13,14]) proposes
six domains that are used in a city’s performance as a smart city: smart economy, smart
governance, smart living, smart environment, smart mobility and smart people. The authors of [15] argue that smart city domains could include smart buildings; their proposed
framework examines the building sector integration and its potential increased effectiveness via the utilization of smart city technologies, specifically smart energy, smart mobility,
smart living and smart environment. The authors of [16] highlight that the domain of
energy comprises an additional domain by itself, which has indeed gained increased significance in recent months in a European, but also a global, context. A different view is
approached by the authors of , where it is argued that the common architecture for
smart cities needs to be multi-tier, consisting of five main layers (natural environment, hard
non-ICT-infrastructure, hard-ICT-infrastructure, services and soft-infrastructure). A similar
approach is adopted by the authors of, where they divide the smart city into three
dimensions: technology (hardware and software infrastructures), population (creativity,
diversity and education) and institutions (governance and policy). The technological aspects of smart cities have been identified as the bridging, but nevertheless core, ingredients
of urban transformation, contributing to the clarity of synergies and dependencies among
various domains and enhancing the digital city concept towards smart cities ; a
more specific analysis on the pervasive use of ICT within the context of smart cities is
provided in . The Smart City Index (SCI)  attempts to further generalize the smart
city domains, categorizing them into smart city assessment, economy, human capital management, mobility, environment and quality of life. It is evident that the energy domain as
a whole, and its core role within sustainability, sits centrally in the smart city development
sphere, embracing, in addition, the digital advancements of the energy sector.
Impact assessment methodologies for evaluating smart city transformation programs
have been developed in recent years, aimed at creating generalized patterns, context and
processes to assist relevant stakeholders towards implementing efficiently transformative
actions and utilizing control mechanisms . An analysis performed by URENIO Research
and ITI-CERTH on 20 cities showed that the most significant factors on the realization
of smart city actions relate to institutional barriers; thus, they suggest that development
and impact assessment methodologies should embrace key stakeholders and carefully
consider the interactions and parameters of localization . Knowledge representation
utilizing ontologies is proposed in  to map linkages and dependencies, with the aim
of also addressing the prioritization of significance. A theoretical framework utilizing
the Genova smart city association is described in  to approach the direct and indirect
benefit identification of smart city partner companies, while in, a dashboard approach
is analyzed with the aim of quantifying, using a five-step process, the performance of
related investments. KPIs serve in such quantification with the additional scope to track


overall performance in wider smart city domains relating to sustainability , but also to
compare performance among different cities . In , the authors proposed 16 KPIs
for measuring the performance of smart city actions, which require both qualitative and
quantitative analysis to be calculated, while ISO 37101 provides a comprehensive highlevel process for implementing sustainable transformations, proposing sectorial indicators
that need to be considered via a combined strategic and operational implementation. ISO
37122 establishes an example list of indicators, categorizing them into 19 domains relating
to sustainability .
A bottom-up approach is used in  to define a taxonomy of 413 detailed indicators
to evaluate, in 10 domains and with 5 types of indicators, the performance of actions in
the context of smart sustainable cities. On the other hand, the standardized normalization
of indicators is proposed in  to link specific domain performance with wider city
objectives and assist with ranking and comparison exercises. The authors of  propose
the use of weighting systems to link city objectives with domain performance, such as
in , where the link with mobility is studied. Such top-down approaches offer a wider
performance evaluation and policy-related context, although they might be lacking the
detail and operational effectiveness that detailed bottom-up KPI development might offer.
Our literature review revealed the lack of a holistic methodology for assessing the
impact of integrated smart city interventions with a focus in the energy domain. This
paper addresses this gap by developing a comprehensive methodology aimed at providing
distinct steps and detailed KPIs which can be used by cities to help them transform towards
smart sustainable cities. We proceed with a detailed analysis of large-scale smart and
sustainable city transformation projects to extract the lessons from methodologies and
real-world examples that have used actual cities and relevant stakeholders to formalize
their methodological approaches.
1.3. Relevant Work from Large Scale Projects
The transition of the passive, reactively changing processes and infrastructure of
existing European cities towards more citizen-centric, environmentally-friendly smart
cities, comprises a high priority in the European’s Commission agenda . In this work,
we gather lessons from previous prominent smart city-related projects, and we formulate an informed, robust and novel methodology for assessing and abetting the smart
city transformation; we focus, as such, on the thorough analysis and critical review of
relevant European projects and initiatives. A detailed understanding of four prominent
methodologies from relevant projects under the Europeans Commission’s (EC) Horizon
2020 umbrella (CITYkeys ; Smart Cities Information System-SCIS; City VITAlity
Sustainability-CIVITAS ; Triangulum ) was achieved and resulted in the evaluation
of the appropriateness and soundness of the Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) these
projects propose.
CITYkeys, defined as a holistic indicator framework, is aimed at facilitating and enabling stakeholders in projects or cities to learn from each other, create trust in solutions, and
monitor progress, by means of a common integrated performance measurement framework.
SCIS is defined as a common platform for data collection and monitoring. SCIS is
a knowledge platform to exchange data, experience and know-how and to collaborate
on the creation of smart cities . Focusing on energy, mobility and transport and ICT,
SCIS showcases solutions in the fields of energy efficiency in buildings, energy system
integration, sustainable energy solutions on a district level, smart cities and communities
and strategic sustainable urban planning.
CIVITAS is a H2020 city transport initiative aimed at analyzing transport metrics .
The CIVITAS initiative is a network for cities that aims to achieve a significant change in the
modal split towards sustainable, efficient and cleaner transport modes, by introducing ambitious measures and policies. It proposes KPIs concerning mostly the transportation sector.
TRIANGULUM, is a recently completed Smart Cities lighthouse project, which presented a process of evaluation and monitoring that adopted a seven-stage impact assessment methodology, supporting replication by ensuring compatibility with other generic
smart city assessment frameworks.
From the above projects, it became clear that the use of metrics, and particularly
KPIs, is becoming more and more necessary in monitoring the progress of activities and
evaluating the achieved impact. Additionally, the use of KPIs is needed in the areas where
cities mostly have to measure their smart city performance, taking into consideration
perspectives such as energy, economic, social and technology.
Table 1 below presents an overview of the KPIs available in the studied projects.
It allows a straightforward verification of their characteristics, including the number of
indicators for each framework, the type of indicator, the assessment scale they are applied
to and the related impact categories.


Our literature review and detailed analysis of large scale projects reveals that, while
previous studies have analyzed relevant KPIs for large-scale smart city projects, there
is a need to better understand the evaluation process, integrating both bottom-up and topdown approaches, including city goals and other stakeholder needs. The research question
that our work is aiming to address is how to accurately measure the impact of actions taken
by cities on their way to smart transformation. The objectives of this research work are to
propose a multi-level approach analysis of the expected impacts and planned interventions
involving both city stakeholders and energy experts and to allow the definition of specific
KPIs for each given case. To achieve these objectives, we provide the distinct contributions
of this paper as follows:

We conduct a thorough review of prominent projects that have approached impact
assessment methodologies for smart cities and have reported significant lessons;
We analyze the city implementation plan in order to have a deep understanding of the
transformation strategy followed and the expected impact;
We define a bottom-up approach for the analysis of interventions and corresponding
actions that constitute the smart urban transformation;
We aggregate and categorize a suite of KPIs that can be used in an assessment process,
focusing on their distinction among categories that allow sectoral evaluation, which
may, however, be integrated into a holistic energy domain assessment;
We provide a normalization approach, detaching the particularities and exogenous
characteristics of cities, both for building and non-building KPIs;
We define a methodology for the evaluation of the process in order to highlight the
findings for overcoming the obstacles that arise during the transition from the design
phase to the implementation and operation; and
We apply our developed methodology in the city of Espoo as part of the city’s planning
stage towards its transformation which is anticipated until 2025.

This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces the proposed methodology
for assessing integrated smart city interventions. Section 3 presents the validation of the


findings for overcoming the obstacles that arise during the transition from the design
phase to the implementation and operation; and

We apply our developed methodology in the city of Espoo as part of the city’s planning stage towards its transformation which is anticipated until 2025.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces the proposed methodology
94
for assessing integrated smart city interventions. Section 3 presents the validation of the
methodology for the city of Espoo. Section 4 presents the discussion on the results and
Section 5 presents the conclusion of the paper.
methodology for the city of Espoo. Section 4 presents the discussion on the results and
Section 5 presents the conclusion of the paper.

There were no explicit materials used for the development of this research. However,Materials and Methodsa number of methods werematerials carefullyused chosen
and development used to complement the extensive literaThere were no explicit for the of this research.However,a ture review presented the previous methods included
workshops on number of methods werein carefully chosen and used Our to complement the extensive literature breaking-down, using Our the methods KPIs, the included coordination of focuson groups with review presented understanding in the previousand chapter. workshops breakingspecific domains for analysis, as well as unstructured
and structured interviews with didown, understanding and using the KPIs, the coordination of focus groups with specific rect and indirect city stakeholders.
domains for analysis, as well as unstructured and structured interviews with direct and The term
smart urban transformation has been broadly used and includes a variety indirect city stakeholders. of areas in which interventions can be made,smart used buildings
and neighborhoods, The term smart urban transformation has such been as broadly and includesa variety of the use
of biginterventions data, smart water waste management, the development of ICT infraareas in which can beand made, such as smart buildings and neighborhoods, the
structure, smart transportation, etc. From these areas, corresponding categories of KPIs use of big data, smart water and waste management, the development of ICT
infrastructure, can emerge with different characteristics and ways of measuring withoftools as dashsmart transportation, etc. From these areas, corresponding categories KPIssuch can emerge boards, smartcharacteristics city and national reporting tools, etc.with Our tools work such mainly focuses on the enwithdifferent
and ways
of measuring
as dashboards,
smart
city
national
etc. Ourwhich
workare
mainly
focuses
the energyand
dataoptiof
ergyand
data
of smartreporting
buildingstools,
and districts
related
to the on
consumption
smart
buildings
andproduction,
districts which
areas
related
to the of
consumption
and optimization
mization
of energy
as well
the increase
self-consumption
and storage.of
In
energy
production,
as wellperspective
as the increase
of self-consumption
and
storage. Insmart
addition,
a
addition,
a non-building
is applied
related to smart
governance,
mobilnon-building
perspective
is
applied
related
to
smart
governance,
smart
mobility,
social
and
ity, social and citizen’s engagement, ICT infrastructures and environment. In the followcitizen’s
engagement,
ICTmethodology,
infrastructures
In the following
section
the
ing section
the proposed
as and
wellenvironment.
as the study participants
involved,
are preproposed
sented. methodology, as well as the study participants involved, are presented.

2.1.
2.1.Developing
Developingthe
theSmart
SmartCity
CityImpact
ImpactAssessment
AssessmentMethodology
Methodology
In
this
section,
the
proposed
methodology
described,
which
consists
of seven
In this section, the proposed methodology isisdescribed,
which
consists
of seven
disdistinguished
steps
and
is
presented
schematically
in
Figure
1.
The
methodology
tinguished steps and is presented schematically in Figure 1. The methodology aims
aimstoto
create
createan
anassessment
assessmentprocess
processfor
forthe
theimpact
impactachieved
achievedby
bysmart
smartinterventions
interventionsinincities
citiesthat
that
are
moving
towards
sustainable
transformation.
are moving towards sustainable transformation.



Forstep
step 1,
1, an
an in-depth analysis
carried
out.
In step
2, the
For
analysis of
ofcity’s
city’sneeds
needsand
andtargets
targetsisis
carried
out.
In step
2,
methodology
adopts
a top-down
approach
from
a technical
perspective,
provided
by a
the
methodology
adopts
a top-down
approach
from
a technical
perspective,
provided
group
of energy
experts,
to determine
the correlation
between
urban and
smart
by
a group
of energy
experts,
to determine
the correlation
between
urban
andtransforsmart
mation and to define
main
of KPIs
withinwithin
city’s targets
and onand
the on
impact
transformation
and to the
define
thelist
main
list ofcontained
KPIs contained
city’s targets
the
impact that the planned actions are envisaged to deliver. In step 3, a bottom-up analysis is
performed from the perspective of city planners and stakeholders. The following step 4
comprises of a collaboration of energy experts and city representatives on the proposed
KPIs. In step 5, the data needs and constraints for the definition of the KPIs, as well as a
data availability check, is performed. The subsequent step 6 consists of the finalization
of the KPIs list, as well as their data-normalization approach, to allow for an objective
and effective comparison. In step 7, an evaluation process is presented to highlight new
findings about success factors and strategies to overcome possible barriers during the





implementation and the operation phases. This step is essentially a sensitivity analysis
of the process. The three phases of project development (design, implementation and
operation) are quite different over time, which means that the initial commitments and
obligations undertaken by the parties involved may change. Changes such as insufficient
cooperation between stakeholders, the absence or insufficient presence of stakeholders in
collaborative activities (e.g., co-creation in business models and sustainable solutions etc.)
and the provision of poor-quality data or information necessary for the calculation of KPIs
are possible obstacles that could prevent the full implementation of the methodology.
The following table (Table 2) presents all parties involved in the proposed methodology,
as well as the stages of participation.


In Europe, cities have been typically developing strategic plans through initiatives
such as the Covenant of Mayors , which brings together many municipalities that
voluntarily commit to implementing EU climate and energy targets. At a national level
(e.g., in Greece), local policies and laws require municipalities to prepare strategic plans,
such as sustainable urban mobility plans and electric vehicle charging plans, and deliver
their actions upon certain approval criteria which adhere to national infrastructure policies.
On the other hand, the involvement of relevant stakeholders who are in key positions
(and potentially hold either permanent or long-term tenures to avoid political conflicts)
is deemed necessary to ensure local engagement and to unlock efficient communication
which may otherwise hindered by bureaucracy. In our approach for the study case of Espoo,
a network of key stakeholders was put together within the framework of the European
Commission-funded H2020 SPARCS project . However, the most important part of
this process is not simply the establishment of the anticipated solutions derived from a
strategic plan, but the awareness of the needs of each city, as well as the understanding and
clarification of the key-objectives, such as those presented below:



The increased integration of renewable energy in the generation mix;
An optimized excess heat management method for the specific city needs and existing
characteristics and infrastructure;
The optimization of local energy systems in the presence of distributed renewables,
storage, demand side management and e-mobility energy resources;
and clarification of the key-objectives, such as those presented below:


The increased integration of renewable energy in the generation mix;
An optimized excess heat management method for the specific city needs and existing characteristics and infrastructure;
The optimization of local energy systems in the presence of distributed renewables,

storage, demand side management and e-mobility energy resources;
An improved energy performance of buildings and districts through human-centric
building
control
optimization,
advanced
retrofitting
and the through
optimization
of districtAn
improved
energy
performance
of buildings
and districts
human-centric
wide
electrical
network
operation;
and
building control optimization, advanced retrofitting and the optimization of districtThe reduction
of GHG operation;
emissions and
and improvement of local air quality and urban
wide
electrical network
well-being.
The reduction of GHG emissions and improvement of local air quality and urban

well-being.
The awareness of a city’s long-term vision facilitates the evaluation of the solutions
and guides
the measurement
their impact.
Therefore,
step towards
impact
The awareness
of a city’s of
long-term
vision
facilitatesthe
thefirst
evaluation
of the an
solutions
assessment
is tomeasurement
understand the
current
state of
cities andthe
study
expected
in the
and
guides the
of their
impact.
Therefore,
firstthe
step
towardsgoals
an impact
context of smart
transformation.
assessment
is to understand
the current state of cities and study the expected goals in the
context of smart transformation.
2.3. Top-Down Analysis
2.3. Top-Down
Analysis
As mentioned
before, the introduction of KPIs as specific measurements that turn the
As mentioned
before, impacts
the introduction
of KPIs values
as specific
measurements
determination
of achieved
into quantifiable
is required
as part ofthat
the turn
keythe
determination
of
achieved
impacts
into
quantifiable
values
is
required
as
part
of
the
target analysis of each city. The first list of KPIs is defined in this step, following a topkey-target
analysis
of
each
city.
The
first
list
of
KPIs
is
defined
in
this
step,
following
a
down analysis of the planned interventions and actions performed by energy experts. This
top-down
analysis
of
the
planned
interventions
and
actions
performed
by
energy
experts.
analysis provides the first understanding of the needs of the city, regarding the metrics
This
analysisbe
provides
theand
firstlays
understanding
of the
ofthe
theevaluation
city, regarding
the metrics
that should
collected,
the foundations
onneeds
which
framework
will
that
should be collected, and lays the foundations on which the evaluation framework will
be based.
be based.
2.4. Bottom-Up Analysis of Interventions and Actions
2.4. Bottom-Up Analysis of Interventions and Actions
The analysis of a city’s general impact targets and the definition of the first KPIs that
The analysis of a city’s general impact targets and the definition of the first KPIs that
can assess the expected impact are the first steps towards understanding the needs of the
can assess the expected impact are the first steps towards understanding the needs of the
smart transformation. In order to completely define the KPIs required to evaluate the spesmart transformation. In order to completely define the KPIs required to evaluate the
cific interventions planned for the city, a detailed bottom-up analysis of their explicit acspecific interventions planned for the city, a detailed bottom-up analysis of their explicit
tions must be carried out, in which city stakeholders, partners and energy experts consider
actions must be carried out, in which city stakeholders, partners and energy experts
each action and intervention in order to document the expected impact of each activity.
consider each action and intervention in order to document the expected impact of each
The lowest level of activity is the individual action. Many actions constitute an intervenactivity. The lowest level of activity is the individual action. Many actions constitute an
tion level and several interventions define a district level. Following the same approach,
intervention level and several interventions define a district level. Following the same
the macro/city level is based on numerous districts. In the same way that these levels are
approach, the macro/city level is based on numerous districts. In the same way that these
structured,
the definition
of KPIs takes
place,
which
means
that,
in order
the
final
levels
are structured,
the definition
of KPIs
takes
place,
which
means
that, to
in define
order to
define
list final
of KPIs
a city,
must bemust
analyzed
in several
districtsdistricts
(Figure(Figure
2).
the
list for
of KPIs
formany
a city,actions
many actions
be analyzed
in several.




As mentioned in previous sections, there are three separate approaches to fully understanding a city’s needs for smart transformation. Throughout this process, many KPIs
are proposed, but further evaluation and in-depth analysis is required to determine a
final list of KPI interventions. Figure 3 presents the collaboration process among energy
experts and a city’s direct and indirect stakeholders. Usually this is a demanding and
time-consuming process as many workshops are required, with the participation of the



derstanding a city’s needs for smart transformation. Throughout this process, ma
are proposed, but further evaluation and in-depth analysis is required to determin
list of KPI interventions. Figure 3 presents the collaboration process among energy
and a city’s direct and indirect stakeholders. Usually this is a demanding and ti
suming process as many workshops are required, with the participation97of the c
ternal and external stakeholders and the energy experts. Initially, all KPIs from t
different approaches are collected and the first version of the KPI intervention li
city’s internal and external stakeholders and the energy experts. Initially, all KPIs from
ated. Feedback is then requested by energy experts from both the city’s direct and
the three different approaches are collected and the first version of the KPI intervention
stakeholders.
As a next
step,
all comments
notes
incorporated,
list
is created. Feedback
is then
requested
by energyand
experts
fromare
both
the city’s directand the
version
of stakeholders.
the KPs listsAs
isacreated.
point,and
a second
of feedback
and
indirect
next step,At
allthat
comments
notes areround
incorporated,
and is req
the
second
version
of
the
KPs
lists
is
created.
At
that
point,
a
second
round
of
feedback
is of the
and final comments are submitted by stakeholders. With the third edition
requested,
and
final
comments
are
submitted
by
stakeholders.
With
the
third
edition
of
the
ready, workshops among energy experts and stakeholders take place and the fin
KPIs list ready, workshops among energy experts and stakeholders take place and the final
set.
list is set.

Figure
Collaboration
among
expertsexperts
and city and
representatives.

Collaboration
among
city representatives.



An
Final
KPIs List
and Data
Collection
Methodology
important
element
of performance
measurement
is represented by the data collec-

tion capability,
which allows
the calculation
of the KPIs.measurement
These KPIs referistorepresented
a wide range ofby the d
An important
element
of performance
categories based on each city’s objectives and cover aspects such as environmental, energy,
lection capability, which allows the calculation of the KPIs. These KPIs refer to
mobility, economic, ICT, governance, citizen engagement and social. However, applying
of categories
based in
onthe
each
city’s
objectives
and
cover
aspects
such as envir
arange
data collection
methodology
project
context
is neither
easy,
nor lacking
obstacles.
tal,theenergy,
mobility, and
economic,
ICT,
governance,
and socia
As
impact assessment
the decision
being
made basedcitizen
on it are engagement
significantly influenced
the data provided;
the use of unreliable
information
seriously
damage
a
ever, by
applying
a data collection
methodology
in themight
project
context
is neither
e
city’s
smart
transformation
targets
by
influencing
the
city
stakeholders
towards
making
lacking obstacles. As the impact assessment and the decision being made based o
the wrong decisions. For this, several forms of feedback collection are utilized to obtain
significantly
influenced
byasthe
data provided;
theconsultation
use of unreliable
information m
the
necessary information
such
workshop
sessions, live
and clarification
riously as
damage
a city’sreviews.
smart To
transformation
targets
byefforts
influencing
thethe
city stake
sessions,
well as offline
assist city partners
in their
to optimize
data
collection
processthe
andwrong
ensure consistency
the measurement
each KPI,
details collec
towards
making
decisions.inFor
this, severalofforms
of the
feedback
of KPI definitions, calculation types, data needs and constraints should be available.






As mentioned before, KPIs are an important tool for assessing the results of smart city
projects, as well as providing valuable information to project managers and city stakeholders. Their use is important for future urban planning, as well as for the development of
sustainable strategies, as long as they provide the right information in the right way. In
order for the results to be meaningful and objectively comparable to each other, or with
similar measurements/findings of relevant projects, they should be normalized, which
means that they must be detached from the particularities and exogenous characteristics
of cities. To achieve this, a normalization process is proposed that would be valuable for
KPI comparisons among smart city projects, as well as to be utilized by individual cities. In
this process, two basic approaches to data normalization related to the proposed KPIs are
presented. The first approach deals with energy measurements related to areas (buildings
or districts), for instance total energy consumption and overall energy reduction, which are
influenced by factors such as weather on an annual basis, and geographical locations. The
second approach deals with non-energy data, such as transport modes, building equipment
management, ICT, etc., which are not affected by geographical location factors.
2.7.1. Energy-Related KPIs
The energy related KPIs of buildings or districts have to be normalized based on
weather data, and a typical approach for this in Finland is to compare the data gathered to
a 30-year average of weather conditions (which will be used for the calculation of Degree
Days), including both early baseline and monitoring consumptions. With this approach,
energy data can be more appropriately normalized regardless of the year and the location
variables. Degree Days are essentially categorized using ambient air-temperature data and
are divided into two distinct parts: the Heating Degree Days (HDD) and the Cooling Degree
Days (CDD). These are used for calculations related to the heating and cooling in buildings,
respectively. For the calculation of HDD figures, a baseline temperature is needed to provide
a measure of how much (in degrees), and for how long (in days), the ambient temperature
(as ambient temperature can be used as the daily mean temperature) is below that baseline.
The difference of the ambient temperature from the base temperature is actually the number
of the HDD for each day. Then, the normalization of energy consumption is performed by
calculating the energy (in kWh) per Degree Day for each kWh of energy-consumption data
for the selected period. It should be mentioned here that it is necessary to set threshold
temperatures in order to determine the limits (meaning the baseline temperature) at which
heating or cooling energy is taken into account for the calculations of both HDD and CDD.
Another factor to consider when comparing the normalized consumption of buildings
should be their energy classification, according to the Energy Performance Certification
(EPC). In order to prepare an energy certificate, it is necessary to carry out an energy
performance assessment of the characteristics and systems of the building, by gathering
information about its components and energy consumption. This information is used as
an input to a calculation model that evaluates the building’s energy consumption under
local climatic conditions and leads to an A-to-G classification that facilitates the rapid
comparison of buildings. Depending on the requirements of each use case, for each KPI,
further values that allow appropriate comparisons, such as the size of the building/district
or the number of residents/citizens and building occupancy, could be considered. In this
context, the general approach proposed could be further enhanced depending on the needs
of each use case and the availability of data.
The normalization process is visualized in Figure 4, where the initial normalization on
energy data takes place based on the Heating and Cooling Degree Days of the candidate city.
As the next step, a second normalization action is performed according to the characteristics
of the study area (e.g., apartment, building, district etc.) that leads to the final form of the
indicator appropriate for evaluation and comparison.

ing occupancy, could be considered. In this context, the general approach proposed could
be further enhanced depending on the needs of each use case and the availability of data.
The normalization process is visualized in Figure 4, where the initial normalization
on energy data takes place based on the Heating and Cooling Degree Days of the candidate city. As the next step, a second normalization action is performed according to the
99
characteristics of the study area (e.g., apartment, building, district etc.) that leads to the


Energy related
related KPI-normalization
KPI-normalization process.
process.


There are various aspects that affect KPIs, so the data need to be analyzed ad-hoc and
as as
sunny
days,
number
or total
capacity
of installed
normalized with
withdifferent
differentfactors,
factors,such
such
sunny
days,
number
or total
capacity
of inequipment,
numbernumber
of citizens
or stakeholders
involved,
number number
of buildings
participating
stalled
equipment,
of citizens
or stakeholders
involved,
of buildings
parin
specific
actions
etc.
However,
the
general
approach
will
remain
the
same.
In
some
cases,
ticipating in specific actions etc. However, the general approach will remain the same. In
the normalization
process is either
unnecessary
or can be done
data into
some
cases, the normalization
process
is either unnecessary
or canbybeconverting
done by converting
units
of
measurement
such
as
equipment
number,
measurement
time,
distance,
etc. This
data into units of measurement such as equipment number, measurement time, distance,
simple
is usuallyisincluded
on the definition
of the KPIs,
further
action
etc.
Thisnormalization
simple normalization
usually included
on the definition
of so
theno
KPIs,
so no
furis required.
the other
hand,
in cases
where
normalization
cannot be included
in the
ther
action isOn
required.
On
the other
hand,
in cases
where normalization
cannot be
indefinition
of
KPIs,
the
important
factors
required
in
each
case
are
taken
into
consideration,
cluded in the definition of KPIs, the important factors required in each case are taken into
e.g., the weather
conditions
for conditions
the production
of energy
fromofRES
are used
such
way
consideration,
e.g.,
the weather
for the
production
energy
fromin
RES
areaused
that
the
final
result
is
objective
and
comparable.
in such a way that the final result is objective and comparable.


2.8. Process Evaluation
A process evaluation aims to highlight why some measures have succeeded or failed
A process evaluation aims to highlight why some measures have succeeded or failed
and includes the evaluation of planning, implementation and operation processes, takand includes the evaluation of planning, implementation and operation processes, taking
ing into consideration the role of support actions such as information, communication,
into consideration the role of support actions such as information, communication, enengagement and participation events. Based on this goal, the process evaluation aims to
gagement and participation events. Based on this goal, the process evaluation aims to dedevelop new findings on success factors and strategies for overcoming potential obstacles
velop new findings on success factors and strategies for overcoming potential obstacles
during the implementation and operation phase, analyzing all relevant information. To
during the implementation and operation phase, analyzing all relevant information. To
achieve this goal, each intervention must be studied in three separate phases, starting from
achieve
thisphase,
goal, each
intervention
be studied inphase
threeand
separate
phases,
starting
from
the design
proceeding
to themust
implementation
ending
with the
operation
the
design
phase,
to the implementation
and
ending
theisoperation
phase.
Below
are proceeding
specific estimates
for each step, asphase
well as
how
eachwith
phase
linked to
phase.
Below
are
specific
estimates
for
each
step,
as
well
as
how
each
phase
is linked to
information, communication and participation activities.

The
Planning
Phase
planning
phase includes activities such as challenge analysis and selection of
the intervention that best addresses this challenge. During this process, and having a
good understanding of the characteristics and benefits that the intervention will offer, the
identification of the target groups and the markets is made first. The different requirements
and needs of citizen or clients lead to the adjustment of the features and services that will
be offered and define, at the same time, the support actions that must be followed for each
intervention. The next step is the conceptualization of activities, such as developing ideas
and design approaches, as well as preparing the initial steps. To achieve these goals, support
actions are at the center, as they allow the interests of stakeholders and target groups to be
validated, as well as opportunities and obstacles to be identified. Examples of measures for


the effective implementation of the intervention planning phase are commitment actions to
define the requirements, information campaigns to increase awareness and communication
and participatory activities with key actors and target groups.
2.8.2. Implementation Phase
During the implementation phase of an intervention, the focus is on monitoring the
progress of the individual actions to be followed for the successful implementation of
the planned objectives. Monitoring the progress of all actions and the interdependencies
between them allows for the detection of delays and the rapid and targeted implementation
of alternative procedures, in order to meet the original schedule and avoid obstacles to other
interventions. The involvement of stakeholders, as well as the appropriate information and
communication activities throughout the implementation phase of the intervention, are of
great importance for the successful execution and prevention of conflicts, as defined during
the planning phase.
 Operational Phase
The implementation phase is the period during which the intervention is made available to the public. Target groups, which are directly affected by the implementation actions,
can use the intervention or are influenced by the results of the intervention. During this
period, the implementation of the monitoring and evaluation framework, as set out in this
document, will allow for an accurate assessment of the impact of operational interventions,
measuring their efficiency and effectiveness. For actions that are well underway, emphasis
should be placed on continuing and strengthening all ongoing activities. For cases where
the impact assessment indicates shortcomings in achieving the expected results, a reassessment of the actions should be considered. It should be noted that the implementation
of appropriate corrective actions is a key element of the process evaluation during the
operation phase. It takes place after the root cause of the weakness has been identified, and
supportive action is needed to bridge potential gaps, such as improving information and
communication campaigns.
3. Results
Validation of the Proposed Methodology in the City of Espoo
The methodology proposed in the present paper started to be implemented in the city
of Espoo in October 2019 by a European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
program under the project name SPARCS and is still in progress.
The city of Espoo is an integrated part of the Helsinki capital metropolitan area
in Finland and is located in the northern shore of the Gulf of Finland. The city covers
528 km2 , is divided into seven major districts and has a population of approximately
280,000 inhabitants. Under the SPARCS project, Espoo is a lighthouse city, meaning that
several demonstrations are taking place in three districts that are in different phases of
development and construction.

•
•
•

Kera is an underdeveloped industrial area that will be rebuilt into a new residential
district with 14,000 citizens;
The Espoonlahti district is the second largest of Espoo’s multiple city centers, with
56,000 residents, and is partially redeveloped; and
The Leppävaara district is the largest of Espoo’s five city centers. As an already built
area, the center of Leppävaara, with over 65,000 residents, is a major urban activity
and transport node.

For the city of Espoo, the first step of the methodology for understanding the objectives
of the city has been made by analyzing the key-goals that meet its needs and requirements.
The five key goals for the city of Espoo are listed below:
(i)

AThe increased integration of renewable energy in the generation mix;


An optimized excess heat management method for the specific city’s needs and
existing characteristics and infrastructure;
(iii) The optimization of local energy systems in the presence of distributed renewables,
storage, demand side management and e-mobility energy resources;
(iv) An improved energy performance of buildings and districts through human-centric
building control optimization, advanced retrofitting and optimization of district-wide
electrical network operation; and
(v) The reduction of GHG emissions and improvement of local air quality and urban
well-being.
These key targets are captured via general impacts and 11 supplementary impacts,
planned to be evaluated in the city of Espoo. In the following Table 3, and by following the
SMART criteria—Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant and Timely, KPIs are
listed for the city of Espoo, based on the top-down analysis performed. It should be noted
here that the KPIs referring to the increase/decrease of a measurement are a comparison
with the situation before the implementation of the planned interventions.
Table 3. Top-down analysis.
Impacts

General impacts



Impact Description

Return of investments, payback time, debt service
coverage ratio, carbon emission reduction, res share,
energy savings

Meeting global and EU climate
mitigation and adaptation goals
and national and/or local energy
air quality and climate targets

Key Performance Indicators
Return of Investment (ROI)
Payback time
Debt Service Coverage Ratio
Total electricity demand reduction
Total heating demand reduction
Reduction of CO2 -eq emissions
Share of RES increase


Unit

EV car sharing rate increase
Increase of EVs share in local
transportation
Transport behavior
Increase of EV (smart) charging
points
Utilization of charging stations




it presents the results of the bottom-up approach concept followed for the
activities planned in the city of Espoo. To simplify the presentation of the results, the action
level KPIs are already consolidated in the intervention level and, in the first column, the
intervention identification and title are listed. In the second column, the number of actions

per intervention is provided, while the third column captures the KPIs per intervention,
proposed from the city partners responsible for their implementation.
Table 4. Bottom-up analysis.
Interventions
Espoo



Table 3 illustrates that the actions in the domains of improving energy efficiency,
electromobility, improving air quality and citizen well-being, smart governance and ICT
infrastructures, as well as citizen engagement were analyzed in depth. This analysis that
was performed both in Espoo’s key targets and in specific planned interventions under
the SPARCS project generated a list of KPIs that can be proven very useful in assessing
the impact of these interventions. A vast amount of proposed KPIs are related to energy
production and consumption, as the decrease of energy consumption and the increase of
energy efficiency are very critical factors on the way to smart transformation. In parallel,
the increased penetration of Renewable Energy Sources (RES) for the production of clean
energy and the use of electromobility, both as transport mode and as alternative energy
storage source to reduce peak energy demand, are fundamental towards environmental
protection and quality-of-life optimization. A very important pillar for the successful urban
transformation is the acceptance of solutions from the citizens and the common vision for a
future city. Thus, many KPIs related to citizen engagement were defined, covering various
domains such as transport preferences, sustainable lifestyle, smart business models and
involvement in code signing. In addition, ICT-related KPIs were proposed as part of the
digitalization in smart cities.

4. Discussion
The transformation of cities towards more sustainable, healthier and citizen-centric
places requires careful analysis of each city’s existing infrastructure, the available resources
and policies in place, as well as the determination and projection of the citizens’ needs. In
the recent years, attempts have been made towards developing strategic plans and breaking
them down into deployable actions; however, we still lack a holistic methodology that
defines the roadmap, the distinct steps and the metrics that are needed to develop, manage
and control a smart city transformation program. In this work, a thorough review and
analysis of such methodologies and metrics was conducted, not only from an academic
perspective but also via a practitioner’s view through research on major smart city projects.
In addition, a real case study was conducted, utilizing stakeholders from across Europe
and locally to the city of Espoo in Finland, to validate our proposed methodology working
by implementing specific actions on three demo sites, as well as investigating the impact
assessment of the envisaged actions in detail. During this process, we thoroughly analyzed
the city’s objectives, as presented in its strategic plan, as well as the planned actions on
the demo sites, aiming at identifying several KPIs for the impact evaluation. The process
for the definition of these KPIs (the initial number of the KPIs was 134) was challenging,
as it was necessary to organize a large number of workshops in which city stakeholders and energy experts participated. A total of 14 workshops were held, during which
18 participants analyzed the proposed KPIs and came up with the final list of 61 KPIs.
The adjustments made during that process were based on the availability of data and the
identification of responsibilities between the city stakeholders for each demonstration area.
It is worth noting that through this process knowledge and experience were transferred
among the participants, promoting the ability to build strong connections and collaborations through participants, resulting in confidence towards action implementation and
continuous improvement. In addition, as part of the engagement process, the workshops
triggered discussions on how Espoo stakeholders could capture the citizens’ awareness
and involvement in smart transformation actions, and how these metrics could be further
measured and evaluated. The work presented in this paper triggers various future direction
areas that start from the validation of our proposed methodology in further cities. Through
the SPARCS project, we have, accordingly, planned to validate our methodology in six more
European cities that are in different stages of their transformation process. This increased
city pool will provide insights on the distinct processes and create further lessons which
could be utilized to extend our proposed methodology in four separate but interlinked
directions. Clear linkages that may help translate initial strategic plans to specific actions,
as well as standardized processes that may contribute to update strategic plans after the definition of actions and impact assessment, could be developed. Impact-monitoring tools that
embed real-time functionalities and contain appropriate and transparent metrics that are
linked and evaluated at the municipal and national level could be designed to facilitate the
appropriate monitoring of national targets and policy evaluation. In addition, the analysis
of further domains that are deemed critical parts of urban living (for example, the domains
included in the Smart City Index ) could contribute towards the multi-dimensional
expansion of our proposed methodology to include further priority areas.
5. Conclusions
Smart cities are the result of a transformation process that many cities around the
world are undergoing, to increase energy efficiency, facilitate citizen participation and
reduce the environmental impact of human activities, while simultaneously digitizing and
interconnecting a variety of processes and to simplifying the lives of their citizens. The
evaluation of the impact this green innovation generates is a very important part of the
smart transformation in order to understand which are the successful interventions and the
reason that others failed. Towards this direction, this paper proposes an impact assessment
framework for smart cities by introducing a seven-step methodology.


Three different approaches are presented in this paper for the definition of the necessary KPIs that were used as the basic tool for the impact assessment: the in-depth
understanding of city targets, a top-down analysis and a bottom-up analysis of planned
actions from city stakeholders and energy experts. These approaches assure that all needs
of a city will be taken into consideration from different perspectives.
Additionally, the collaboration of all involved parties (energy experts and direct and
indirect stakeholders) was proposed so that a final and valid KPIs list is defined and the
calculation of all essential metrics is ensured. This process leads the data collection activities
and prepares the ground for the normalization of the KPIs in order for them to be a useful
tool to objectively compare metrics in different interventions.
As part of the methodology, and in order to highlight new findings about success factors and strategies to overcome possible barriers and obstacles during the implementation
and the operation phase, a process evaluation procedure was proposed.
The application of this methodology started in the city of Espoo in 2019 and is still in
progress; however, some of the results were presented here in order to validate the accuracy
of the framework.


