energies
Article

Analysis and Evaluation of the Feasibility of Positive Energy
Districts in Selected Urban Typologies in Vienna Using a
Bottom-Up District Energy Modelling Approach
Hans-Martin Neumann 1, * , Ali Hainoun 1 , Romana Stollnberger 1 , Ghazal Etminan 1 and Volker Schaffler 2
1

2

*



Citation: Neumann, H.-M.; Hainoun,
A.; Stollnberger, R.; Etminan, G.;
Schaffler, V. Analysis and Evaluation
of the Feasibility of Positive Energy
Districts in Selected Urban Typologies
in Vienna Using a Bottom-Up District
Energy Modelling Approach. Energies
2021, 14, 4449. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en14154449
Academic Editors: Paola Clerici
Maestosi and Luisa F. Cabeza

AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, 1210 Vienna, Austria; ali.hainoun@ait.ac.at (A.H.);
romana.stollnberger@ait.ac.at (R.S.); ghazal.etminan@ait.ac.at (G.E.)
Federal Ministry for Climate Action, Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation and Technology (BMK) of
Austria, 1030 Vienna, Austria; volker.schaffler@bmk.gv.at
Correspondence: hans-martin.neumann@ait.ac.at; Tel.: +43-50550-6071

Abstract: This article investigates the potential of selected urban typologies in Vienna to reach the
state of Positive Energy Districts (PED) by achieving a positive annual energy balance. It follows
the EU initiative for implementing at least 100 PED in Europe by 2025. Four urban typologies have
been assessed using the bottom-up energy modelling tool MAPED that enables a simplified energy
demand-supply analysis at the district scale. Considering relevant urban typologies in different
construction periods, the analysis focused on converting the allocated building stocks into PED by
employing comprehensive thermal refurbishment and energy efficiency measures, electrification of
end-uses and fuel switching, exploitation of local renewable energy potential, and flexible interaction
with the regional energy system. The results reveal that a detached housing district can achieve a
positive annual energy balance (for heat and power) of 110% due to the fact that there are sufficient
surfaces (roofs, facades, open land) available for the production of local renewable energy, whereas
the remaining typologies fail to achieve the criteria with an annual balance ranking between 61%
and 97%, showing additional margins for improvement to meet the PED conditions. The presented
concept offers a practical approach to investigate the PED suitability of urban typologies. It will help
the Austrian Ministry for Climate Action and Environment to identify appropriate strategies for the
refurbishment of existing urban areas towards the PED standard.
Keywords: Positive Energy Districts; urban typology; energy modelling; energy and climate goals;
energy flexibility; sustainable urban development

Received: 1 May 2021
Accepted: 15 July 2021
Published: 23 July 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

1. Introduction
It has become apparent that sustainable urban development can only be achieved
through a significant change in the way we build and manage our urban spaces. Transforming urban energy system is a key driver of the aspired development to make cities
and human settlements inclusive, sustainable, and resilient, as elaborated in Goal 11 of
the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) [1]. Within this effort, Positive Energy
Districts (PEDs) represents an innovative concept for the development of urban districts
and neighbourhoods.
PEDs refer to urban neighbourhoods with the ability to achieve a positive energy
balance on an annual base within its given boundary. This means that the cumulative
annual energy provided within the district boundary must exceed its annual own demand
and compensate for any external energy supply. Hereafter, defining the system boundary
of a PED is crucial for achieving an annual positive energy balance because of internal
energy consumption and local renewable energy production. Such boundaries might refer
to geographical, functional, or/and virtual domains [2].

4.0/).

Energies 2021, 14, 4449. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14154449

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

2 of 16

The Joint Programming Initiative Urban Europe (JPI-UE) proposes the following
definition in its publication, “Framework Definition for Positive Energy Districts and
Neighbourhoods” [3]:
“Positive Energy Districts are energy-efficient and energy-flexible urban areas
which produce net zero greenhouse gas emissions and actively manage an annual local or regional surplus production of renewable energy. They require
integration of different systems and infrastructures and interaction between
buildings, the users and the regional energy, mobility and ICT systems, while
optimising the liveability of the urban environment in line with social, economic
and environmental sustainability”.
This definition builds also on previous contributions and ongoing discussions
around the realisation and deployment of PEDs as originally highlighted by
Temporary Working Group (TWG) 3.2 of SET-Plan Action 3.2 on implementation
plan of PEDs [2].
The resulting definition highlights three pillars for realising PEDs from the viewpoint
of sustainable energy system (Figure 1):
1.
2.
3.

High level of energy efficiency: to keep district annual energy consumption as low as
achievable.
Local/regional renewable energy supply:
Optimised and flexible energy system: to optimised interaction with the neighbourhood energy system and manage consumption and storage capacities on demand.

Figure 1. Functions and pillars of Positive Energy Districts (PEDs) within the urban energy system
(Source: AIT).

Following the above definition PEDs seeks to optimise the three functions towards
climate neutrality and energy surplus considering the guiding principles of quality of life,
inclusiveness and sustainability. It has been recognised that the contribution of various key
stakeholders and enablers is essential to enable the realisation and deployment of PEDs
covering:
urban governance and regulatory framework,
Engagement of citizen and need-owners,
Integration of urban and energy planning for a sustainable and resilient PEDs
Employment
ICT and integrated energy solutions, e.g., sector coupling and EV.

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

3 of 16

2. The Positive Energy Districts (PEDs) Policy Context
The main driver for PEDs is currently the climate and energy policy of the European
Union (EU) and its member states. The EU is speeding up innovation in clean energy
and calls for decarbonization of the EU building stock by 2050 [4]. Such a transformation
requires innovative technological solutions (with a focus on the integration of energy
systems), in addition to regulation, financing, governance, new business models, and other
associated socio-economic issues. Several European initiatives have been taken in this
direction, aimed at achieving the EU long-term energy and climate goals; among them
are the SET-Plan Action 3.2 “Smart Cities and Communities” [5] and the recently adopted
European Green Deal to reach climate-neutrality by 2050 [6].
The prominent EU initiative under SET-Plan Action 3.2 SCC considers PEDs as a
driver of sustainable urbanisation. In its declaration of intent published in 2016, it seeks
to “make Europe a global role model in integrated, innovative solutions for the planning,
deployment and replication of Positive Energy Districts with the aim by 2025 to have at
least 100 Positive Energy Districts synergistically connected to the energy system in Europe
and a strong export of related technologies” [5]. This initiative is the result of extensive
consultations with several stakeholders, including European Innovation Partnership on
Smart Cities and Communities, Covenant of Mayors, EERA Joint Programme on Smart
Cities, Joint Program Initiative Urban Europe, EU SCIS, ERA-NET on Smart cities and
Communities, beside public consultation. The initiative stresses that PEDs raise the quality
of life in European cities, contribute to reach the COP21 targets, and enhance European
capacities and knowledge to become a global role model. Following this initiative, the
temporary technical working group 3.2 (TWG 3.2) was established. Chaired by national
representatives from Austria, TWG 3.2 developed in a joint effort a pathway towards PED
in Europe, including a technology roadmap. In addition, it specified commitment for
planning and implementation actions [2]. The outcomes of this effort resulted in proposing
an integrated approach to tackle the interdisciplinary challenges of PEDs covering technological, economic, financial, legal, and regulatory aspects within an urban perspective.
Moreover, it recognised the crucial role of cities on the way to realise PEDs together with
the vital contribution of key stakeholders from research, industry, real state, and funding
and financing, beside other fields.
Based on this initiative, the transnational Joint Programming Initiative Urban Europe
(JPI-UE) has been working to provide a programme management structure for PEDs
research activities. It aligns research efforts with cities’ needs and their apprehended future
sustainable development goals, including the deployment of PEDs. The JPI programme
seeks, for its implementation, the contribution of stakeholders of city authorities, research
organisation, industry, energy suppliers, and citizens’ organisations. [3].
Considering the attractiveness of the PEDs concept for sustainable urban development,
numerous initiatives have been taken to develop solutions, roadmaps, and business models
for planning and implementing PEDs [7,8]. Such initiatives benefit from the wealth of
experiences gained in the construction of positive energy buildings (PEBs) that form the
building blocks of future PEDs, leveraging innovative technologies for building, integrating,
and managing buildings within an integrated neighbourhood energy system.
The IEA Annex 83 “Positive Energy Districts” [9], a research network under the
auspices of the International Energy Agency (IEA), is currently documenting the international state of the art. Besides several European Universities and research organizations,
it involves participants from Canada, Australia, Japan, and China (Hong Kong). In the
United States of America, for example, researchers from the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory (ENREL) have developed a definition for a “Zero Net Energy Community” [10].
NREL is also involved in the Smart City project and Zero Energy District “Peña Station” in
Denver [11]. These initiatives show that the interest in PED is growing rapidly, not only in
Europe, but also globally.
However, PEDs are still in the early stage of their introduction with a significant
need to overcome a multitude of challenges spanning across technological, financial,

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

4 of 16

environmental, societal, and regulatory domains. This stems from the fact that a PED is
not just an energy standard, but rather an innovative concept to promote the sustainable
development of urban energy systems on a district scale with significant impact on the
development of our future cities, which are committed to a sustainable and low-carbon
pathway to ensure high viability and affordability of urban services for all residents.
3. From Zero Energy Buildings to Positive Energy Districts
The concept of PEDs is related to the concept of Near Zero Energy Buildings (NZEB)
and Zero Energy Buildings, for which several concepts have been developed and demonstrated worldwide. Not only do Net Zero Energy Buildings (NZEBs) and Zero Energy
Buildings (ZEB) not consume energy, but they also generate renewable energy onsite. This
allows for a high share of self-consumption and thus a reduced carbon footprint [12].
Many studies have analysed how buildings can be designed, built, maintained, and
refurbished to become NZEBs or even ZEBs [13]. The findings of these studies provide
valuable insights into the development of PEDs. However, there are significant differences
in the challenges that need to be taken when an NZEB is planned and a PED is developed.
However, framework conditions for the planning and implementation of a Zero Energy
Building and Positive Energy Districts differ significantly:
Zero Energy Buildings are usually new buildings, planned and built by one developer.
The architects, engineers, and other technical experts are involved in the project work on
behalf of this developer. This means that plans and other data are exchanged freely within
the planning team. After the realization, the building is usually operated and maintained
by a single building operator on behalf of the owner. Positive Energy Districts, however,
usually consist of already existing buildings, with new buildings as infills. Typically, the
buildings have several owners and operators. Information on energy consumption and
building technology tends to be incomplete. The transformation of a neighbourhood into
PED takes longer than the planning and construction of a ZEB, as not all necessary measures
can be implemented at the same time. During the planning and implementation of PEDs, a
multitude of actors need to be involved, including not only the building owners, but also
tenants, energy utilities, and several branches of the city administration. For the operation
phase, a multi-party energy management system and contractual arrangements for the
exchange of energy (e.g., in the form of a Renewable Energy Community) must be set up.
Due to these structural differences, PEDs require different planning approaches and tools
than ZEBs. This applies to the pre-assessment, planning, and monitoring and evaluation
phases. In this article, we will present a planning method that allows to pre-assess which
urban neighbourhoods have the potential to become a PED, based on urban space types.
Urban space types have been used in several studies in urban energy planning. Everding and Kloos [14] developed prototypes for solar urban neighbourhoods, relating to
14 urban spaces found in many cities. Genske, Jödecke, and Ruff [15] developed a tool to
identify the potential of renewable energy supply within different types of typologies of
urban neighbourhoods and open spaces. The tool assesses the potential of not only roofs
in generating renewable energy, but also façades as well as the immediate surroundings
of buildings, urban open spaces, and the urban subsoil. An updated version of this tool
is described in Everding, Genske, and Ruff [16], where their energy model is discussed
in detail. Another example of the use of space types to model urban energy demand
and potential for renewable energy was developed by Hegger and Dettmar [17]. Their
typology of urban spaces provides information on the energy and structural characteristics
of typical settlement forms. In addition, they characterize green open spaces, water areas,
and street spaces by energy requirements and potential. Although several typologies and
related urban energy models have been developed in recent years, they have so far not
been tailored for the pre-feasibility assessment of PEDs.

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

5 of 16

4. Approach and Methodology for Evaluating Positive Energy Districts (PEDs)
Bringing PED concepts into implementation requires conducting pre-feasibility studies
that rely on mapping promising urban typologies and examine their conversion potential
towards PEDs. This article presents a new approach to assess the potential of different
urban typologies to reach a PED standard, based on typology, for urban neighbourhoods.
The aim is to provide an easy-to-use and applicable approach to test and inspect the
potential for implementing PEDs in cities and municipalities that aim towards a carbonneutral future.
Our work is embedded within this realm and provides its scientific contribution in
two-folds. First, offering a systematic approach for mapping urban typology and examining
their conversion potential towards PEDs, considering the social, technological, climate and
urban planning criteria of the nominated sites. Second, conducting a simplified quantitative
energy assessment of the selected site to define and specify the needed measures to attain a
PED with annual positive energy balance.
Building on the elaborated approach of defining and specifying PEDs, a simplified
concept was developed to evaluate the suitability of different urban typologies to generate
more energy than it consumes and reach the status of one of the defined PED types. For this
purpose, the bottom-up modelling tool MAPED (Model for Energy Analysis of Positive
Energy District) was developed. MAPED enables the user to analyse and evaluate the
energy demand-supply of urban districts and additionally offers the possibility to test
different scenarios and implementation measures to explore the transformation pathways
towards a PED.
To retrieve a typical district’s potential to become a PED, the following steps need to
be followed:
-

-

Identification of relevant urban typologies (detached housing area/single-family
homes (SFH), terraced housing (TH) area, multi-family housing (MFH) area, apartment blocks (AB)) for different construction classes,
Data collection as input for the MAPED tool using the GIS-based approach to extract
area boundaries, population, built-up area, building footprints, etc.,
Mapping and modelling the district energy system within MAPED,
Analyses of different supply options and related conditions for implementation.

4.1. Selection of Different Urban Typologies
To ensure applicability in European cities, it was important to select different urban
typologies that can be refurbished and built elsewhere as well. Based on Vienna´s urban
neighbourhood typology that was developed by the Municipal Department for Urban
Development and Planning [18], four typologies were selected (Figure 2):
1.
2.
3.
4.

Detached housing built 1961–1980: 91% single-family homes (SFH), 9% terraced
houses (TH)/multi-family homes (MFH),
Dense inner-city area (Gründerzeit), built before 1919: ~100% MFH,
Medium dense area built between 1961 and 1980 (economic boom): 63% SFH, 5% TH,
32% MFH, non-residential use with about 7% of the gross floor area,
Detached housing constructed from 2006: 100% SFH.

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

6 of 16

Figure 2. Selected urban typologies (according to [19]).

4.2. Mapping of District Data
Based on the typologies, the selected areas were assigned data in a further step.
The data was derived from the official buildings and dwellings register [20], mapped
to statistical grid cells of 250 m× 250 m from the statistical office (Table 1). The dataset
contains important data for the analyses with MAPED, such as population, buildings by
type of use (e.g., residential building with number of dwellings, hotel, office building,
retail, agricultural use, etc), and buildings by construction period. By means of geographic
information systems (GIS) and various geodata layers, relevant parameters were extracted
and calculated within the 250 m grid typology, such as the districts´ total, gross, and
built areas; type, size, and height of residential and non-residential buildings (dwelling
and service), and population and number of dwellings. Based on the selected typologies
and the related official buildings and dwellings register, the key data needed to conduct
the simplified energy demand-supply analysis for the considered districts were prepared
(Table 2).
4.3. Short Description of the MAPED (Model for Energy Analysis of Positive Energy
District) Model
MAPED is a bottom-up rapid energy assessment tool for analysing the energy demand
and supply of urban districts and assessing their qualification to reach an annual positive
energy balance by exploiting local RES to cover a district’s electricity and heat demand.
MAPED was developed by AIT, based on the proven end-use concept of the IAEA model
MAED [21]. MAPED focuses on the evaluation of useful and final energy demands at
the district scale, covering energy demands for residential and non-residential building,
urban farming, industry, and mobility. Moreover, it offers a simplified approach to evaluate
and estimate local renewable energy production to cover heat and electricity demands
using photovoltaic, solar thermal energy, and heat pumps. Other local supply options
like biomass, waste heat, and micro wind can be also considered, given the prevailing
boundaries, topology, social acceptance, and the applied regulations (Figure 3). The
MAPED approach evaluates final and useful energy demands based on the demographic,
social, and technological data of the considered district and services to the social, economic,
and technological factors that affect the demand for a particular fuel (this could also

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

7 of 16

include urban farming and local industrial activities in case of their existence). This implies
population number and growth, number of inhabitants per dwelling, number of electrical
appliances used in households and services, peoples’ mobility and preferences for transport
modes, evolution of the efficiency of certain types of equipment, and market penetration of
new technologies or energy forms. The expected future trends for these determining factors,
which constitute ‘scenarios’, are exogenously introduced. This enables evaluation of the
needed measures to convert the considered district to a PED within the given demographic,
social, technical, and building types’ specifications.

Figure 3. MAPED (Model for Energy Analysis of Positive Energy District) concept for the disaggregation of district energy
demand, by fuel and consumption sectors (source: AIT); HP—heat pump, PV—photovoltaics.

For the analysis of energy usage in households, five types of dwellings are included,
each type described by the size of the apartment/house, number of people living in
each type, and energy efficiency of each type for heating and cooling. The service sector
(non-residential building) is modelled based on the type of economic activities that affect
the type of buildings, and their energy uses. Thus, five groups of service activities are
considered, covering offices, educational institutions, shopping and commercial activities,
hospitals, hotel, and restaurants. This feature allows for a realistic analysis of energy
demands and enables to explore the possibility of a “Positive Energy District”, given
the type of building operational energy and the potential of local renewables and their
technical exploitation. Based on the conducted district energy demand-supply analysis,
key indicators are generated to evaluate the district self-sufficiency to cover its energy
demand and achieve a positive annual energy balance.
4.4. District Input Data for MAPED (Model for Energy Analysis of Positive Energy
District) Analysis
Following the above-described end-use approach of MAPED, several input parameters
are needed to conduct a final energy demand analysis describing the current state and the
conceived future development towards the set target of a PED, assuming to be reached
by 2040. Beside the specified urban typology (Table 1), the input data cover the following
categories:

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

8 of 16

•
•
•

•

•

Demographic, social data: total population, dwelling size, person per dwelling, share
of each dwelling type,
Climate data: heat degree days (HDD) and cooling degree days (CDD),
Technological data: average heat loss coefficient of building envelope, efficiency,
and penetration rates of final fuel consumption by end-use category (e.g., share and
efficiency of gas and biomass for covering space heating), share of dwelling area
cooled,
Specific energy consumption data: current final energy consumption by fuel type
and end-use form for space heating and cooling, water heating and cooking, lighting,
appliances,
Potential of local renewables: estimated potential for PV on rooftop area, facades,
open land area, and transport infrastructure area in the district.
Table 1. Base data of the selected urban typologies.

Data Description

Detached Housing
1961–1980

Dense Inner City before 1919

Total area [m2 ]
Gross floor area [m2 ]
Share of residential area
Share of service area

62,500 m2
23,760 m2
100%
-

62,500 m2
100,250 m2
100%
-

Service sector floor area

-

-

Built-up area [%/m2 ]
Traffic area [%/m2 ]

27%/17,170 m2
17%/10,330 m2
56%/35,000 m2
(private green)
312
154

50%/31,520 m2
30%/18,760 m2

Green area [%/m2 ]
Population
Number of dwellings
Single-family homes
[share/area in m2 ]
Building with 2 dwellings
[share/area in m2 ]
Building with 3 or more
dwellings [share/area in m2 ]

Medium Dense
1961–1980

Detached Housing 2006

2512
1429

125,000 m2
66,510 m2
93%
7%
1970 (22% nonresidential:
11% commercial and 11%
hotels/restaurants)
19%/23,200 m2
20%/24,440 m2
2%/2000 m2
(public green)
1071
521

17%/10,420 m2
16%/10,210 m2
9%/5450 m2
(public green)
376
143

91%/150 m2

-

63%/150 m2

99%/150 m2

2%/75 m2

1%/75 m2

5%/75 m2

1%/75 m2

7%/65 m2

99%/65 m2

32%/65 m2

-

-

62,500 m2
19,400 m2
100%
-

The specific energy consumption data per dwelling (and dwelling size) and by end-use
activities of water heating, cooking electricity consumption of appliances were collected
from the energy survey on household energy consumption of statistics in Austria [22]. The
current technical state of building insulation for the considered typologies and building
types refers to the standard energy performance certificate of the defined “generic building types” for Austria provided by the TABULA Typology structure of the EPISCOPE
project [23,24]. To reach the status of a PED, measures specifically targeting the framework
conditions and challenges for each typology must be applied. While it is difficult for dense
inner areas to harvest locally available energy sources due to the limited availability of
space for renewable infrastructure plants like large-scale PV on open land, it is easier for
detached housing districts due to more land availability. Another limiting factor in multifamily-houses is the dependency on many tenants if some plants are to be refurbished
or newly built. Table 2 presents exemplarily the data used for the first type, “Detached
housing”.
For future developments towards the PED 2040 target, the following assumptions
have been applied:

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

9 of 16

•

•
•

•
•

Adopting effective building refurbishments to reach an advanced level of space heat
energy performance, according to the Austrian building standard OIB RL 6 for low
energy buildings [25],
Significant efficiency improvements in space and water heating, lighting, and appliances over the period of 2020–2040,
Fuel switch from fossil to renewable supply with focus on electrification of end-use
activities of cooking, space heating, and water heating via a heat pump (HP) beside
solar thermal energy (ST),
No biomass (BM) is considered,
Increasing the penetration rate of HP and ST to fully cover the heat demands for space
and water heating by 2040, as follows:
-

•
•
•
•
•

Space heating: 75% HP, 15% ST, and 10% direct electricity as a backup system
for ST
Water heating: 63% HP, 30% ST, and 7% direct electricity as a backup system
for ST

Improvement in the Coefficient of Performance (COP) of HP by around 37% to reach
3.8 by 2040,
Utilisation of the top local renewable energy potential with focus on PV and ST, aiming
at meeting the annual electricity and heat demands from local renewables,
Interaction with the electricity grid of the city, beside local power storage, has been
assumed but not explicitly modelled,
Increasing the share of dwellings requiring cooling from 5% to 20% over the period of
2020–2040
No change in population number, person per dwelling, Heating Degree Days (HDD),
and Cooling Degree Days (CDD).

Table 2. Annual key parameter for modelling the energy demand of the detached housing district.
Data Description

Current State 2020

PED-Target 2040

Population
HDD/CDD
Heat loss coefficient (W/m2 K)/ EPC 1 (kWh/m2 a)
Water heating (kWh/cap)
Cooking (kWh/dw)
Lighting (kWh/dw)
Appliances, non-shiftable (kWh/dw)
Appliances, shiftable (kWh/dw)
Penetration of energy forms into SH: elec./district
heating/fossil/BM/ST
Penetration of energy forms into WH: elec./district
heating/fossil/BM/ST
COP of HP

312
2919/857
2.06/144.3
1054
500
365
838
1146

312
2919/857
1.0/70
843
500
292
670
917

12.8%/32%/50.2%/2.5%/2.5%

85%/-/-/-/15%

18.9%/35.6%/36.8%/0.4%/8.3%

35%/-/-/65%

2.5

3.8

1

Energy Performance Certificate; HDD—Heating Degree Days, CDD—Cooling Degree Days; SH—space heating; BM—biomass; ST—solar
thermal; WH—Water heating; COP—Coefficient of Performance, HP—heat pump.

5. Results and Discussion
Following the above-presented concept and the compiled input data, a detailed energy
demand-supply analysis has been conducted for each of the four considered districts.
The following sections demonstrate the results for the typology of the first district type
(Detached Housing District). The remaining three typologies are addressed in a similar way.
5.1. Energy Demand
The adopted transformation measures on the demand side in terms of efficiency
improvement and electrification of end-uses will boost the overall district energy efficiency
by 66.2%, resulting in annual district final energy demand reduction from 3.94 GWh to

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

10 of 16

1.33 GWh. The applied fuel switching and electrification for end-use will lift the share
of electricity from the current 20% to 72% of the total final demand of the projected PED.
The resulting average annual final energy demand per dwelling will decrease from the
current 25,552 kWh/Dw (dwelling) to 8640 kWh/Dw of the targeted PED, corresponding
to 179 kWh/m2 and 61 kWh/m2 , respectively (Figure 4). The decrease of space heating
from the current 80% to 50% for PED state is remarkable, beside the increased share of
appliances from 7% to 18%. The achieved reduction in space heat final energy demand,
which dominates and drives the desired transition to PED, is the direct result of two
combined measures, namely effective building refurbishments and the shift to highly
efficient HP—its share is assumed to rise from the current 3.4% to 70%.

Figure 4. Distribution of final energy demand by end-use activities for the expected PED, compared to the current state for
the considered detached housing district (source: AIT).

The specific final energy for space heat demand is estimated to drop from 144 kWh/m2
to 30.6 kWh/m2 and the useful space heat demand (corresponding to the EPC) from 128.8
to 70 kWh/m2 , following the adopted effective building refurbishment. The results indicate
a transition from externally provided supply in terms of fossil fuel and district heating to
local supply of HP and ST.
5.2. Energy Supply
The observed transformation will be enabled mainly through the electrification of
final energy, enabled by the local renewables supply of PV, besides the contribution of ST
to cover part of the hot water and space heating. On an annual basis, around 72% of the
district final energy demand will be provided by PV and 28% by ST (Figure 5). Around 76%
of ST will be devoted to HW and the remaining 24% to SH. Local PV-generation covers
the remaining HW demand, main part of SH (76% via HP), and all electricity demands
for appliances, lighting, space cooling (SC), and cooking. Moreover, it is assumed that
the district will interact with regional electric and heat networks in the neighbourhood to
account for the needed flexibility to compensate for energy deficit and surplus over various
periods of the year. The technical potential of PV depends on available areas of rooftops,
south facades, open land, and transport infrastructure. For a realistic harnessing of the
local renewable energy of the detached housing district, the following combination was
adopted after intensive consultation with building developers:

•

•
•

40% of the roof top area is used for PV panels: intense consultations with real estate
developers reveals that no more than 60% of the roof area can be utilised for the
installation of PV or solar thermal. The adopted figures in this analysis is based on
experts’ recommendations.
5% of the roof top area is used for ST collectors,
10% of the south façade is used for PV panels.

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

11 of 16

The resulting electricity generation density (yield per square meter) for PV amounts
to 144.7 kWh/m2 , comparable to the documented average value of 153.8 kWh/m2 for
Vienna (MA20, 2018). For solar thermal, the resulting thermal generation density is around
447.5 kWh/m2 , which is close to the highest confidence value specified for Vienna in the
range of 450–600 kWh/m2 for the low temperature heat [26]. The resulting annual output
is 1.054 GWh for PV and 0.384 GWh for ST.

Figure 5. Key development indicators of transforming the detached housing district to PED (source:
AIT). EL—electricity; SH—space heating; ST—solar thermal.

The exploitation of local renewables will evolve during the process of building refurbishment, which will proceed within a participatory process following a common
agreement among the tenants/owners of the buildings in the considered district. With
regards to the regulatory challenges for deploying PEDs, such a process can be triggered
and accelerated by the applied incentives and promotion measures, beside the introduced
regulations by the considered municipality, a governance challenge that needs to be tackled
hand in hand with other challenges to enable the desired transition towards PED.
5.3. Flexibilization Need
The energy consumption of electricity and heat follows certain load profiles that
change over days, weeks, and seasons showing periods of high demand (in the evening
and during the cold winter days). In the current energy system infrastructure, the needed
flexibility is offered completely by the supply system provided by the national/regional
electricity grid (and gas and district heat grid), besides the big storage facility for fossil
fuel. However, with the increased share of intermittent renewable energy sources (RES),
additional flexibilisation options are neded, like local electric and heat storage. Since
these measures have limited availability at the district scale (due to cost and operational
management issues), the interaction with the regional energy supply infrastructure, e.g.,
regional electric grid and district heat grid, are indispensable in offering feasible solutions
to help overcome the supply deficits, particularly in the winter time, and manage the
energy surpluses produced in summer. Figure 6 presents the approach applied to handle
flexibility needs to ensure adequate heat supply around the clock. Using typical normalised
monthly load curves for space heating and hot water demands, beside the production
curve of solar thermal in the considered district site, the figure demonstrates the periods
of deficit and excess of heat supply through solar thermal energy. Based on the specified
potential of ST, 76% of hot water and 24% of annual space heat demands can be covered
by the installed solar thermal systems. However, cumulative heat excess and heat deficits
that are compensated on an annual basis need further flexibility measures to manage the

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

12 of 16

timely mismatch between demand and supply curves. The flexibility need is assumed
to be achieved by interaction with the regional electric grid and district heating network,
which are assumed to absorb heat excess in summer and provide compensation in winter.
Other alternatives might be the availability of local heat storages. Similar behaviour is
observed by comparing the PV supply curve with the electricity demand curve cumulating
all electricity end-use (for HP, lighting, and appliances). In this case, flexibility will be
ensured by interaction with the regional electric grid, beside locally available electricity
storages.

Figure 6. Monthly load curves for HW—hot water and SH—space heating demand and the supply curve of local ST—
solar thermal: demonstrating the period of heat excess and deficit of the conceived PED in a detached housing district
(source: AIT).

Table 3 summarizes comparatively the main results of evaluating the PED suitability
of the four evaluated typologies in Vienna, elaborated in terms of select KPIs.
The results show that with the applied energy demand-supply measures, “Detached
Housing” has the potential to become a PED with an annual positive energy balance of
110% of electricity supply with PV and 103% of heat supply with ST. The New Detached
Housing fails to reach the PED-status by 10% due to the lower density of buildings, which
means that fewer façades and roof surfaces are available for PV or solar thermal energy;
the Medium Dense Housing fails by around 38%; and the Dense Inner-City by 55%. Hence,
with further improvement in energy performance (there is still good potential for further
energy performance improvement by enhancing the building shale insulation and using
energy efficient window (e.g., adaptive thermochromic glazing with double glass). It
is a matter of cost as such measures will go beyond the current standard of building
refurbishment) and slightly increased use of open area for PV-panels, New Detached
Housing can attain the status of PED. The results also reveal that the higher the buildings
and the fewer open spaces in the district, the more difficult it becomes to achieve a PED

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

13 of 16

status within the defined geographical boundary of the district. Figure 7 depicts the
evolution of key indicators used to demonstrate the transition from the current state to
a PED for the various considered typologies depicted for the specific final and useful
energies.
Table 3. Key performance indicators (KPIs) for evaluating the energy demand-supply features of the selected typologies
and their capability to become a PED.
KPIs

Detached Housing 1961–1980
current

2

Dense Inner City before 1919

PED

current

Medium Dense 1961–1980

PED

current

PED

Detached Housing 2006
current

PED

FE/m

179.4

60.7

183.0

73.4

199.6

76.6

130.9

55.5

UE/m2

165.0

102.4

168.8

106.8

166.4

104.3

121.4

90.7

FE/Dw

25,552.3

8640.4

11,912.4

4778.7

23,704.2

9095.8

19,504.0

8271.4

UE/Dw

23,497.8

14,582.6

10,990.3

6953.1

19,757.8

12,382.7

18,087.7

13,513.7

SH-UE/m2

128.8

70.1

112.4

57.6

125.5

68.0

85.7

58.8

SH-FE/m2

143.4

30.6

125.2

25.1

151.0

35.5

95.5

25.7

EL share in FE

20.4%

72.3%

24.6%

67.6%

22.2%

70.8%

23.9%

71.5%

SH share in FE

80.0%

50.4%

68.4%

34.2%

75.7%

46.3%

72.9%

46.2%

SRPV

5.2%

109.7%

2.0%

45.0%

3.0%

61.6%

4.5%

89.6%

18.8%

102.5%

12.2%

60.6%

16.7%

91.3%

20.4%

97.0%

SRST

Dw—dwelling, EL—electricity, FE—final energy, UE—useful energy, SH—space heating, SR—supply ratio, calculated on an annual basis to
cover electricity demands by local PV—Photovoltaics) and part of space heating and hot water by local ST—solar thermal.

Figure 7. Supply ratio of PV—Photovoltaics and ST—solar thermal for the four analysed typologies
in Vienna (source: AIT).

Finally, it is noteworthy that the realisation of a PED depends further on the cost of
the proposed energy demand-supply measure of eco-refurbishment, electrification of the
end-uses, and harnessing the locally available areas of rooftops, facades, and open places
for PV and ST.
6. Conclusions and Outlook
The concept of PED represents a promising innovative solution with great leverage
for the realization of urban energy and climate goals. It promotes urban change towards
energy-optimized, integrative, and resilient cities. Given the fact that cities are responsible
for about 75% of energy consumption and 80% of GHG emission—with the building
sector alone responsible for around 28% [27,28]—the expected impact of implementing
and deploying PEDs within Europe will have a significant role in enabling the targeted
urban energy system transformation, given its high potential for energy-saving and local
renewable energy integration.

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

14 of 16

Our study analysed the potential of four selected urban typologies to achieve a
positive annual energy balance and thus become PEDs. Among the analysed typologies,
the detached housing neighbourhood built between 1961 and 1980 shows the potential
to become a PED under the given assumptions, and the more-energy efficient, but also
significantly denser detached housing neighbourhood built after 2006 comes very close to
the PED standard. The medium-dense neighbourhood built between 1960 and 1980 comes
close to renewable self-sufficiency for heat supply, but is far off for electricity supply, while
the inner-city neighbourhood built before 1919 does not show potential to become a PED.
The results clearly show that PEDs require not only a very high level of energy efficiency,
but also sufficient open spaces (including roofs and facades) for the local generation of
renewable energy. If these two criteria are met, and the density of the neighbourhood
does not become too high, the PED standard can be reached. An integrated planning
process aligning urban and architectural design and energy planning is therefore key for
the successful development of PEDs.
Considering that PEDs are expected further to generate an annual surplus of energy
that can be used outside the district, PEDs will have a significant impact on the efficient and
low-carbon urban energy system transformation once deployed among EU cities. In this
regard, the substitution rate of buildings is low, compared to other energy-intensive sectors;
thus, PEDs as a new innovative idea will help accelerate the transformation of building
stock, given their high promising potential and the expected adaptation by building
regulation and certification. This will directly result in accelerating the urban energy
system, beside the expected indirect impact of the triggered technological innovation for
improving the use of local renewables and flexibilization options, and their impact on the
overall energy system.
The demonstrated screening and modelling approach is replicable in other areas and
typologies due to its flexible bottom-up approach, which allows integrated energy demandsupply analysis at the district scale. However, there is the need to expand MAPED for
improved modelling of flexibilization options, which need an integrated spatio-temporal
assessment of the district energy system to capture existing synergies among the different
use types (different dwelling types and building usages). It is therefore planned to include
improved modelling of flexibilization, which will further enhance the applicability and
replication potential of the established methodology. Future activities will deal with the
question of designing and building local heat and power storages at the district scale. This
effort requires additional considerations analysis based on techno-economic optimisation,
considering the limits and constraints related to the interaction between the public heat
and power grids and the applied regulatory framework. Further analysis effort is also
needed to address the electricity demand for electric vehicle (EV) and the potential of the
interaction of building and mobility as an additional flexibilization option.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization by H.-M.N., A.H., V.S; methodology, software, validation,
and investigation—A.H., R.S., G.E., H.-M.N.; data curation—R.S., G.E., H.-M.N., A.H. writing—
original draft preparation, A.H., H.-M.N., R.S., G.E.; writing—review and editing, H.-M.N., V.S., A.H.;
visualization—R.S., G.E., A.H.; supervision—H.-M.N.; project administration—H.-M.N.; funding
acquisition, H.-M.N. and G.E. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
manuscript.
Funding: This journal article presents the results of the study “Aufbereitung städtischer Energiedaten
für zukünftige Plus-Energiequartiere” (Preparation of urban energy data for future plus-energy
districts), financed by the Republic of Austria via contract FN 252263a.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

15 of 16

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the Federal Ministry for Climate Action,
Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation and Technology of Austria (BMK) and the Austrian
Research Promotion Agency (FFG) for the excellent collaboration.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Abbreviations
BESS
BEVs
BM
BMK
DHCS
DSM
CHP
Dw
EV
FE
GHP
HDD
HP
HW
LHCs
MAPED
NZEB
NZED
NPC
PEDs
PE
PV
SC
SH
SG
ST
TRM
UE
WH

Battery energy storage system
Battery-powered electric vehicles
Biomass
Bundesministerium für Klimaschutz, Umwelt,
Energie, Mobilität, Innovation und Technologie
District heating/cooling system
Demand site management
Combined heat power
dwelling
Electric Vehicle
Final Energy
Geothermal heat pump
Heat Degree Days
Heat pump
Hot water
Lighthouse cities
Model for Analysis of Plus Energy District
net-zero energy building
net zero energy district
Net present costs
Positive Energy Districts
Primary energy
Photovoltaic
Space cooling
Space heating
Smart grid
Solar thermal
Technology Roadmap
Useful energy
Water heating

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

UN-SDGs. Sustainable Development Goals, 17 Goals to Transfer Our World. 2016. Available online: http://www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/ (accessed on 23 April 2021).
European Commission. SET Plan Action No. 3.2 Implementation Plan; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2018.
JPI Urban Europe. PED Reference Framework; JPI Urban Europe: Vienna, Austria, 2019.
European Parliament, Council of the European Union. Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May
2010 on the Energy Performance of Buildings; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2010; Chapter 12; Volume
3, pp. 124–146. Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32010L0031 (accessed on
23 April 2021).
European Commission. SET Plan—Declaration of Intent on Strategic Targets in the Context of an Initiative for Smart Cities and
Communities; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2016.
European Commission. The European Green Deal; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2019.
Polly, B.; Kutscher, C.; Macumber, D.; Schott, M.; Pless, S.; Livingood, B.; Van Geet, O. From Zero Energy Buildings to Zero Energy
Districts; National Renewable Energy Laboratory: Golden, CO, USA, 2016.
The Rocky Mountain Institute (RMI). An Integrated Business Model for a Zero-Energy District; RMI: Peshawar, Pakistan, 2017.
IEA EBC—Annex 83—Positive Energy Districts. 2021. Available online: https://annex83.iea-ebc.org (accessed on 23 April 2021).
Carlisle, N.; Van Geet, O.; Pless, S. Definition of a Zero Net Energy Community. Technical Report NREL/TP-7A2-46065. 2009.
Available online: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy10osti/46065.pdf (accessed on 23 April 2021).
Polly, B. Zero Energy Districts. 2009. Available online: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy18osti/71424.pdf (accessed on 23 April 2021).

Energies 2021, 14, 4449

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

16 of 16

Hedman, Å.; Ur Rehman, H.; Gabaldón, A.; Bisello, A.; Albert-Seifried, V.; Zhang, X.; Guarino, F.; Grynning, S.; Eicker, U.;
Neumann, H.-M.; et al. IEA EBC Annex83 Positive Energy Districts. Buildings 2021, 11, 130. [CrossRef]
Belussi, L.; Barozzi, B.; Bellazzi, A.; Danza, L.; Devitofrancesco, A.; Fanciulli, C.; Ghellere, M.; Guazzi, G.; Meroni, I.; Salamone, F.;
et al. A review of performance of zero energy buildings and energy efficiency solutions. J. Build. Eng. 2019, 25. [CrossRef]
Everding, D.; Kloos, M. Solarer Städtebau: Vom Pilotprojekt Zum Planerischen Leitbild; Kohlhammer: Stuttgart, Germany, 2007.
Genske, D.; Jödecke, T.; Ruff, A. Nutzung Städtischer Freiflächen für Erneuerbare Energien; Erschienen: Bonn, Germany, 2009.
Everding, D.; Genske, D.; Ruff, A. Bausteine des energetisch-ökologischen Stadtumbaus. In Energiestädte; Springer Spektrum:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020. [CrossRef]
Hegger, M.; Dettmar, J. Energetische Stadtraumtypen: Strukturelle und Energetische Kennwerte von Stadträumen; Fraunhofer IRB
Verlag: Stuttgart, Germany, 2014.
Nitsch, D. Wohngebietstypen; Beiträge zur Stadtentwicklung: Vienna, Austria, 2016.
Stadt Wien. Katalog Wohngebietstypen 2016 Wien. Available online: https://www.data.gv.at/katalog/dataset/eab5ce18-827f-44
a8-a206-e56f772dfa8b (accessed on 23 April 2021).
Statistics Austria. Gebäude- und Wohnungsregister; Statistics Austria: Vienna, Austria, 2016.
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). MAED, Model for Analysis of Energy Demand—User’s Manual; Computer Manual
Series No. 18; IAEA: Vienna, Austria, 2006.
Statistics Austria, Overall Energy Consumption of Households, Vienna. 2019. Available online: https://www.statistik.at/web_
en/statistics/EnergyEnvironmentInnovationMobility/energy_environment/energy/energy_consumption_of_households/
index.html (accessed on 23 April 2021).
TABULA. WebTool. 2017. Available online: http://webtool.building-typology.eu/?c=all#bm (accessed on 23 April 2021).
Amtmann, M. Reference Buildings, The Austrian Building Typology, Classification of the Austrian Residential Building Stock; Scientific
Report D 6.9; Austrian Energy Agency: Vienna, Austria, 2019.
Österreichisches Institut für Bautechnik (OIB). Requirement for New Buildings and Major Renovations; OIB RL 6 Energie-einsparung
und Wärmeschutz; Österreichisches Institut für Bautechnik (OIB): Vienna, Austria, 2019.
Wiener Umweltanwaltschaft (WUA). Zukünftige Chancen der Solarthermie in Wien; WUA: Vienna, Austria, 2008.
International Energy Agency (IEA). Tracking Buildings; IEA: Paris, France, 2019.
Lucon, O.; Ürge-Vorsatz, D.; Zain Ahmed, A.; Akbari, H.; Bertoldi, P.; Cabeza, L.F.; Eyre, N.; Gadgil, A.; Harvey, L.D.D.; Jiang, Y.;
et al. Climate Change 2014: Mitgation of Climate Change. In Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovern-Mental Panel on Climate Change; Edenhofer, O., Pichs-Madruga, R., Sokona, Y., Farahani, E., Kadner, S., Seyboth,
K., Adler, A., Baum, I., Brunner, S., Eickemeier, P., et al., Eds.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK; New York, NY,
USA, 2014.

