sustainability
Article

Approaches to Social Innovation in Positive Energy Districts
(PEDs)—A Comparison of Norwegian Projects
Daniela Baer 1, *, Bradley Loewen 2 , Caroline Cheng 1 , Judith Thomsen 1 , Annemie Wyckmans 3 ,
Alenka Temeljotov-Salaj 4 and Dirk Ahlers 3
1

2

3

4

*



Citation: Baer, D.; Loewen, B.;
Cheng, C.; Thomsen, J.; Wyckmans,
A.; Temeljotov-Salaj, A.; Ahlers, D.
Approaches to Social Innovation in
Positive Energy Districts (PEDs)—A
Comparison of Norwegian Projects.
Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su13137362
Academic Editor: Kristian Fabbri

SINTEF Community, NO-7034 Trondheim, Norway; caroline.cheng@sintef.no (C.C.);
judith.thomsen@sintef.no (J.T.)
Department of Interdisciplinary Studies of Culture, NTNU—Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway; bradley.loewen@ntnu.no
Department of Architecture and Planning, NTNU—Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway; annemie.wyckmans@ntnu.no (A.W.); dirk.ahlers@ntnu.no (D.A.)
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, NTNU—Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway; alenka.temeljotov-salaj@ntnu.no
Correspondence: daniela.baer@sintef.no

Abstract: The Positive Energy District (PED) concept is a localized city and district level response to
the challenges of greenhouse gas emission reduction and energy transition. With the Strategic Energy
Transition (SET) Plan aiming to establish 100 PEDs by 2025 in Europe, a number of PED projects
are emerging in the EU member states. While the energy transition is mainly focusing on technical
innovations, social innovation is crucial to guarantee the uptake and deployment of PEDs in the built
environment. We set the spotlight on Norway, which, to date, has three PED projects encompassing
12 PED demo sites in planning and early implementation stages, from which we extract approaches
for social innovations and discuss how these learnings can contribute to further PED planning and
implementation. We describe the respective approaches and learnings for social innovation of the
three PED projects, ZEN, +CityxChange and syn.ikia, in a multiple case study approach. Through the
comparison of these projects, we start to identify social innovation approaches with different scopes
regarding citizen involvement, stakeholder interaction and capacity building. These insights are
also expected to contribute to further planning and design of PED projects within local and regional
networks (PEDs in Nordic countries) and contribute to international PED concept development.
Keywords: social innovation; positive energy districts; PED; energy transition; smart cities; zero
emission neighborhoods; sustainable positive energy neighborhoods; positive energy blocks; Norway

Received: 19 May 2021
Accepted: 23 June 2021
Published: 30 June 2021

1. Introduction
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

Reaching the climate gas reduction goals of the Paris Agreement is a challenge for
stakeholders on all geographical and governance levels, from nations, regions, cities and
districts. Cities and, especially, the district level, are pointed out as one of the important
areas for change because cities consume approximately 80% of the total energy and are
accountable for approximately 75% of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions [1]. Significant energy savings, emission reduction, the realization of economies of scale and increased
energy security can be realized by considering holistic solutions on the district level. From
a governance perspective, districts offer the appropriate arena for collaboration between
different sectors and stakeholders in order to enable a holistic and inter-sectoral approach
to energy planning as an integrative part of sustainable urban development [2,3]. The
Positive Energy District (PED) concept is a localized response on the district level to the
challenges of emission reduction and the European energy transition. It integrates local
energy generation, plus-buildings and infrastructure with wider strategic and stakeholder
approaches to anchor energy efficiency and renewable energy sources at the district level.

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13137362

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

2 of 21

The PED approach is formulated on the European level through European initiatives,
such as the Strategic Energy Transition (SET) Plan and is mainly based on technological
innovations in the field of energy efficiency, renewable energy production and energy
flexibility. However, we turn attention to the role of the social dimension, in particular
the generation of social innovation in the planning, implementation and achievement of
PEDs at the local level. A social innovation is defined as a new idea that aims at meeting
social goals [4]. Thus, the role of social innovation within PED development is to enable
the improvement of well-being for citizens and civil society in general.
Sustainability transition studies argue for a prominent role of citizens in the achievement of successful transitions, namely giving them a prominent role within the quadruple
helix model (industry, government, academia and civil society) and emphasizing the
citizen-oriented innovation approach [5–7]. The role of citizens is especially relevant in
the Nordic model of sustainable development, which focuses heavily on social inclusion
to promote the energy transition amongst other sustainability-related practices and behaviors [8,9]. The involvement of citizens in the development of PEDs can be seen as one
means to foster social innovation in PED development.
As the PED concept, and the development of the first PED projects in Europe, is at an
early stage, we examine the practical approach towards social innovation in Norwegian
projects. We ask: What is the variety of social innovation approaches in planning and early
implementation of PED projects in Norway and what are the learnings to guide future PED
developments in social innovations? To answer these questions, we focus on the early planning
and implementation stage of PEDs, according to the status of Norwegian PED projects.
The objective of this paper is to give practitioners and researchers guidance on the future
planning and design of PED projects regarding social innovation activities. Thus, the value
of the research is to identify and map social innovation approaches in Norwegian PED
projects and synthesize practical guidance for future PED projects.
This paper proceeds to introduce the PED concept and definition under development,
as well as the concept of social innovation within the PED approach in Section 2. Section 3
will introduce the methodology applied to investigate the social innovation approaches and
the context of PED development in Norway. We will introduce the three case studies and
present the identified approaches in Section 4, discuss implications for social innovation in
Section 5 and conclude with how these findings can contribute to the further development
of the PED concept.
2. Background: PED Concept and Social Innovation
2.1. PED Definitions
We take, as a point of departure, the body of work generated by European initiatives to
define PEDs and shape frameworks and strategies for PED development and future implementation. PED concept development has been acknowledged as a work-in-progress [10],
while the primary sources for definitions indicate a general consensus on its basic elements.
The European Commission defines Positive Energy Blocks/Districts as “several buildings
[ . . . ] that actively manage their energy consumption and the energy flow between them
and the wider energy system”. They have “an annual positive energy balance”, “are
designed to be an integral part of the district/city energy system” and are “intrinsically
scalable and [ . . . ] well embedded in the spatial, economic, technical, environmental and
social context of the project site” [1]. Similarly, the Joint Programming Initiative on Urban
Europe (JPI UE) defines PEDs as “energy-efficient and energy-flexible urban areas or groups
of connected buildings which produce net zero greenhouse gas emissions and actively
manage an annual local or regional surplus production of renewable energy. They require
integration of different systems and infrastructures and interaction between buildings, the
users and the regional energy, mobility and ICT systems, while securing the energy supply
and a good life for all in line with social, economic and environmental sustainability” [10].
An operational definition of PEDs is evolving based on input from the eighth European framework program for Research and Innovation Horizon 2020 (H2020) Light-

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

3 of 21

house projects, the calls for which were designed to be in accordance with the SET
Plan. The operational definition highlights the transitional aspects of PEDs and defines pathways of multiple ambition levels, ranging from importing clean energy from
outside, up to fully self-sufficient and autonomous operation. Initial results of these
PED definition workshops are summarized in [11], including the transitional approach
identifying several possibilities for PED configuration. This underlines the ambition of
PEDs as a process of growth and transition. Recent work has also initially analyzed
overall PED implementation approaches in Europe and discusses their operational focus areas [12]. Technical definitions are also made available by related projects (e.g.,
https://cityxchange.eu/knowledge-base/positive-energy-districts-ped/) (accessed on 19
May 2021).
2.2. SET Plan Approach
The SET Plan aims to establish 100 PEDs by 2025 under Action 3.2 [13]. The delicate
balance between technological and societal dimensions of PEDs is reflected in the set of
eight challenges and requirements of the plan. On the one hand, integrated technological
innovations play a key role. They do so by tackling the innovation need across building,
energy, mobility and ICT sectors, including integrated urban energy system operation
and planning and the digital planning of cities. They also maximize the use of renewable
energy resources and designing flexibility options across different building types within
the district in interaction with the wider energy system of the surrounding neighborhood.
Technological innovations, supported by regulatory mechanisms to enable these processes,
are indispensable to realize PEDs. On the other hand, social innovations are also imperative
for transition. The eventual aim is to ensure that PEDs will be affordable for the majority of
citizens and to generate wide public acceptance. Therefore, eventual realization calls for
consumer-driven innovation in new energy markets. In particular, the transition from the
passive consumer to the active prosumer role needs to be supported. In addition, a plethora
of actors from technical experts to public administration and regulatory authorities will
need to be activated and trained to establish the knowledge base for and supporting the
whole process of developing and deploying PEDs. Urban authorities will have to take on a
strong leadership and facilitator role to ensure that citizens and businesses as well as the
wider community know, understand and participate in PED development.
2.3. Social Innovation Approaches
In the early 1960s, a theoretical differentiation between technical and social innovations was already described [14], but the concept of technological innovation gained
stronger attention than social innovation in the literature [15]. In recent decades, however,
social innovation has risen in prominence in the policy sphere, including on the EU level,
as there developed a shared expectation towards the empowering potentials of social
innovations and as the process of innovation is understood as a social action that mobilizes
civic creativity and problem-solving capacity [16]. Social innovation is often seen from a
perspective of empowerment, as a means for realizing development with citizens and other
stakeholders as self-reliant actors who take change and development into their own hands,
especially under pressing social, economic and environmental challenges [17]. Focusing on
social innovation in PED development aids in orienting the technical innovation aspect
towards the improved quality of life of citizens and civil society [18].
Referring again to the eight key challenges and requirements for PED development
identified in the SET Plan, three relate to the domain of social innovation: stakeholder
interaction, citizen participation and capacity building [13]. Stakeholder interaction is one
crucial element for enabling social innovation within the quadruple helix model of cooperation involving stakeholders from the public and private sectors, academia and civil
society [19]. A strong emphasis is placed on citizens and their needs, introducing an element of democratization in the innovation process. One of the current arguments around
sustainable development is that it should be attained within the framework drawn up by

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

4 of 21

a democratic society [20]. The challenges of PEDs address the difference between sociotechnical disciplines and segregation of their strategies, interests and perspectives, and
challenges of governance in which citizens can contribute to the co-creation of solutions
within this context. This calls for an intermediary which encompasses both perspectives,
to create a counterbalance and engender consensus over important decisions [21,22]. The
public sector represents an intermediary of social innovation in the urban environment [23].
Broad stakeholder interaction is supported for PED implementation in the view of the
EU Smart Cities Information System (SCIS) and ongoing Horizon 2020 PED Lighthouse
projects [24].
The closely related field of smart cities applies social innovation to socio-technical
systems with citizens as end-users [25], directing attention to citizen participation in technical innovation processes. In recent years, smart city initiatives have fallen short of their
objectives to meet user needs due to a lack of participation and public value creation [26].
According to Hollands (2008), smart cities should begin with people and human capital, and technical systems should support their vision of the city [27]. This indicates a
bottom-up approach that, in relation to grand societal challenges, must meet top-down
initiatives related to the decarbonization of cities. Building on Arnstein’s (1963) ladder
of participation [28], Cardullo and Kitchin (2019) developed the scaffold of smart citizen
participation, showing levels of power to influence the outcome of participation processes
from ‘non-participation’—e.g., in a way to convince the end-user to apply technology in
a desired way—to ‘inclusive’, with citizens as co-creators in innovation processes and
outcomes [29]. While research on citizen participation methods remains relatively scant,
a recent review specifies roles of citizens as democratic participants, co-creators and ICT
users in a multi-stakeholder ecosystem comprised of public servants, political representatives and ICT managers [30]. Expanding these lists for PEDs, we can also consider the
roles of citizens as energy producers and consumers, adding representatives from energy,
engineering and utility companies, the real estate, building and construction sector, and
financial intermediaries to the multi-stakeholder ecosystem. Attempts to open smart city
solutions to citizen participation can be seen in the Nordic context, for example, through
sustainable refurbishments [31].
To enable social innovation, the ability of stakeholders to co-create is crucial. One
aspect of that can be described by the term capacity building. Capacity building is defined
as activities that strengthen the abilities, knowledge, skills and behavior of individuals
(individual capacity building) or organizations (organizational capacity building) [32,33].
Capacity building is thereby understood as both a process for improving the capacities of
individuals and, at the same time, as an outcome of that process [34]. In relation to citizen
participation, capacity building can be understood as local actors (including government
institutions) aiming to enable citizens to participate or to build up human capital in the
form of skills, experiences and knowledge [35,36].
For the PED concept to be realized in a sustainable way, the PED community of
practitioners and researchers not only faces a multitude of technological requirements and
challenges, but also has to address a host of social innovation aspects with regard to the
planning and early implementation of PEDs. Yet social aspects are the least researched
amongst the topics addressed in the PED literature [37]. From this review and based on the
SET Plan framework [13], we select the most described and case-relevant approaches to
enabling social innovation within PED deployment as: citizen involvement, stakeholder
interaction and capacity building (see Figure 1).
Given the diverse social, economic and political contexts of localities implementing
PEDs, there will probably be no simultaneous universal and detailed strategy that can be
applied to achieve low-carbon urban development through PED approaches. Rather, those
involved in urban development are challenged to identify and adapt suitable strategies
within their geographical city, operational towards PED implementation [38]. Sustainable
transition of the built environment and successful implementation of the PEDs within the

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

5 of 21

respective urban districts therefore asks for a balanced approach towards innovation that
is combining technological and social dimensions [39].

Figure 1. Social innovation approaches relevant for PED development, own figure based on [13].

In the remainder of the paper, we set the spotlight to Norway to analyze existing
approaches towards social innovation as a complementary part to technological innovations
in PED development and to take into consideration its diverse local contexts. Norway
currently has one of the largest numbers of PED projects in development [37,40,41]. The
aim is to extract learnings from a multitude of approaches towards social innovation in
diverse localities that will contribute to PED concept development and help other PED
projects in planning and designing their approaches. We therefore ask: What is the variety
of social innovation approaches in planning and early implementation of PED projects in Norway
and what are the learnings to guide future PED developments in social innovations?
3. Methodology
3.1. Research Approach
This research adopted a qualitative comparative case study method, which is useful for
highlighting similarities and differences between cases through the study of phenomena in
various contexts [42]. We paid particular attention to conceptual and procedural differences
in PED projects to enable a dialogue between theory and evidence [43]. The comparative
method is used in the social sciences where laboratory conditions are often not possible.
With a small number of cases, we used the ‘found experiment’ cases for within- and
cross-case analysis of PEDs in different real-world contexts. The cases were limited to
Norway, providing for a common political-institutional, social and economic environment
and allowing us to focus on the planning, process, and technical differences between the
cases through a ‘method of difference’ approach for concept development and early-stage
implementation. A qualitative approach was also chosen due to limited data availability of
quantitative indicators from the projects at their early stage of development.
The approach enabled a comparison of three PED projects in Norway—ZEN, +CityxChange and syn.ikia—from which we drew insights on the challenges from the early stages
and relevant dimensions for enriching the PED concept. More specifically, the analysis
provided an understanding of the different foundations of PED projects in Norway, the
different approaches to social innovation within the PED concept and characteristics of
specific projects, and learnings from early-stage PED planning and implementation. This
comparison was done in 2020.
3.2. Context of Developing PEDs in Norway
Before expanding upon the potential for social innovation in PEDs, it is relevant to
set the particular context of sustainable development in Nordic countries and Norway.
Norway is in a unique position regarding PED developments to investigate early-stage
implementation of PEDs. Not only is Norway’s power system based on renewable energy
with the electricity production based mainly on hydropower, but the initiative for PED

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

6 of 21

development and the PED concept is supported and fits within Norway’s high-level energy
strategies and policies, thereby positioning Norway in a prominent role towards decarbonization of the electricity system. The initiative for PED development, with the focus on
local energy generation, is supported and fits within high-level strategies and national policies. Norway aligns with the Nordic approach to sustainable development, which includes
a common strategy for implementing Agenda 2030 and the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) [44] and has the tendency to preference social aspects of sustainability [8,9]. Thus,
the Nordic setting presents favorable conditions for exploiting highly technical solutions
for energy transition such as PEDs, in a way that emphasizes social dimensions. Social
innovation within the Nordic model relates to activities that are social in both needs and
ends, such as collaborations between multiple stakeholders in a community that initiate
and drive developments to meet new challenges of the future [45,46].
In 2008, the Norwegian Parliament had decided that Norway should become carbon
neutral by 2050 and, recently, Norway enhanced its nationally determined contribution
under the Paris Agreement to reduce emissions by at least 50%, and towards 55% compared
to 1990 levels, by 2030 [47]. While there is no specific regulation for PEDs, the policy
framework consists of different laws and regulations, guiding principles, white papers
and standards which influence the implementation of PEDs. Prominent amongst these are
EU directives with relevance to the EEA (including Norway): The Energy Performance
of Buildings Directive (EPBD) and Energy Efficiency Directive (EED). Through these,
which have yet to be completely transposed and adopted in Norway, progressively stricter
efficiency requirements are being put into force. For the energy sector, the national energy
laws (Act on the production, transformation, transfer, turnover, distribution and use of
energy, Energy Act, (Norwegian: Energiloven; LOV-1990-06-29-50 (https://lovdata.no/
dokument/NL/lov/1990-06-29-50)) (accessed on 19 May 2021), require the development
of energy and climate plans on the municipal level. Furthermore, in the Norwegian
context, energy efficient solutions should become the preferred choice for consumers in
the future [48]. The National Water and Energy Directorate (NVE) introduced the pluscustomer arrangement to enable the rise of prosumers in Norway. The country’s clean and
renewable energy resources for national demands, technological readiness and orientation
of sustainable development towards social objectives encourages the deeper analysis of the
social dimension in PED development.
Citizen involvement in urban development is guaranteed by the Planning and Building Act (LOV-2008-06-27-71 (https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/2008-06-27-71) (accessed on 19 May 2021), which has the aim of promoting sustainable development in the
best interests of individuals, society and future generations. According to the Act, planning
should facilitate coherence between multiple sectors, functions and interests of society.
Public participation is the responsibility of municipalities and regional authorities. According to a study of 16 Norwegian municipalities, the number of participation measures does
not affect the level of citizen participation but does affect citizens’ perceptions of being
heard [49]. The actual approaches and quality of citizen participation are described as varied. We can see that early participation more often leads to long-term citizen engagement,
while late participation has advantages and disadvantages for the citizen. On the one hand,
the issues at stake become more specific and concrete, but on the other, the citizens’ real
influence on the decision becomes more limited.
4. Results
4.1. Case Analysis
Case 1: ZEN Centre. The Research Centre on Zero Emission Neighbourhoods in
Smart Cities (ZEN Centre) (https://fmezen.no/) (accessed on 19 May 2021) will last eight
years (2017–2024), and the budget is approximately 48 million EUR, funded by the RCN,
the research partners NTNU and SINTEF, and the user partners from the private and
public sector in Norway. NTNU is the host and leads the Centre together with SINTEF.
The goal is to develop solutions for future buildings and neighborhoods with zero life-

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

7 of 21

cycle greenhouse gas emissions and thereby contribute to a low carbon society. The ZEN
approach is building primarily on reduction of embodied emissions and energy demand
and is aligned with compensation of emissions by renewable energy production [50]. The
ZEN Centre, as a follow-up center to the Centre for Zero Emission Buildings, has 11
public partners, including Trondheim municipality, 21 industry partners and 2 research
partners (NTNU and SINTEF). The partners of FME ZEN cover the entire value chain of
built environment development on a neighborhood scale in the framework of smart cities
and include representatives from municipal and regional governments, property owners,
developers, consultants and architects, contractors, energy companies, manufacturers of
materials and products, and governmental organizations.
The ZEN Centre will contribute to and manage a series of neighborhood-scale demo
sites, which will act as innovation hubs and as testing grounds for the solutions developed in the ZEN Centre [51]. They are geographically limited, primarily urban areas in
Norway, in which the Centre’s researchers, together with the user partners, test the ZEN
indicators under development and new solutions for the construction, operation and use
of neighborhoods. This is in order to study how to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions on
a neighborhood scale towards zero.
Case 2: +CityxChange. The aim of +CityxChange (https://cityxchange.eu/) (accessed on 19 May 2021) is to develop and deploy Positive Energy Blocks (PEBs) and
Districts (PEDs) to achieve sustainable urban ecosystems that generate a surplus of local
renewable energy by co-producing more energy than is consumed, integrating eMobility and energy trading, connecting energy and urban planning, involving citizens and
stakeholders, improving quality of life and exchanging experiences with other cities across
Europe. Co-creation of positive energy blocks and districts (PEB/PED) will be fulfilled
through strategic alignment with city ambitions, citizen and stakeholder engagement and
involvement, integrated planning, common energy markets, the use of digital services
in an ICT ecosystem framework [31], regulatory sandboxes, integrated eMobility and
sustainable business models. The expected outcomes include operational and scalable PED
prototypes, an increase of local renewables and self-consumption, GHG emission reduction,
meaningful stakeholder engagement and recommendations for policy intervention, market
(de)regulation and business models that deliver positive energy communities. The project
is structured around 11 topical and domain-specific demonstration projects that together
form a holistic approach to PED development. These are developed in its two Lighthouse
Cities and will be replicated in its five Follower Cities and beyond. +CityxChange is an EU
H2020 Innovation Action project from the Smart City and Communities program and one
of, to date, 18 high-level Lighthouse projects working on secure, affordable and clean energy in European Smart Cities (https://smartcities-infosystem.eu/scc-lighthouse-projects)
(accessed on 19 May 2021). Direct funding is 20 million EUR, with an overall volume
around 35 million EUR, running from 2018 to 2023. The consortium for +CityxChange
consists of 32 partners: the 7 involved municipalities, 2 universities, 9 large enterprises,
2 distribution network operators, 9 SMEs, and 3 non-profit organizations. The Norwegian
University of Science and Technology (NTNU) is coordinating the project with the two
Lighthouse Cities of Trondheim, Norway and Limerick, Ireland, and five Follower Cities of
Alba Iulia, Písek, Sestao, Smolyan, and Võru.
Case 3: Syn.ikia. Syn.ikia (https://synikia.eu/) (accessed on 19 May 2021) is an EU
H2020 Innovation Action project that started in 2020 and will run until 2024. Syn.ikia puts
forth the concept of SPEN (Sustainable Plus Energy Neighbourhood) where the geographical boundary is expanded from the building level to the entire site of the neighborhood
development, including local storage units and energy supply units [52]. The mission
in syn.ikia is to increase the proportion of SPENs with surplus renewable energy in different contexts, climates and markets in Europe. The project aims to achieve more than
100% energy savings, 90% renewable energy generation triggered, 100% GHG emission
reduction, and 10% life-cycle costs reduction, all compared to the 2020 nearly zero energy
buildings. Syn.ikia will actively speed up the development of technologies for energy

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

8 of 21

efficiency, renewable energy sources, storage, flexibility, and exploitation (replication, market upscale, risk reduction) to all relevant market actors via four real-life demonstration
cases in four climatic zones. One of the demonstration cases will be in Oslo, representing a
sub-arctic climate.
An overview of the three cases is presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Overview of the cases.
Category

ZEN

+CityxChange

syn.ikia

A. Program and Call Information
Timeframe

8 years (2017–2024)

5 years (2018–2023)

Project Context

Follower project of FME ZEB on
Zero Emission Buildings

Project based on NTNU Smart
Cities and Communities
approaches and city ambitions

Main Funding Agency

Research Council of Norway

Project Type

Research Centre

European Commission-Horizon
2020
Innovation Action

Program

FME—Research Centre for
Environmentally Friendly
Energy

H2020-EU 3.3.1.3.—Foster
European Smart cities and
Communities

Topic of Call

N/A

Budget

48 million Euro

EU H2020-LC-SC3-1-2018-20192020: Smart Cities and
Communities
35 million Euro

4.5 years (2020–2024)
Internationalization of FME
ZEN to participate in
international fora to exchange
knowledge and experience
European Commission-Horizon
2020
Innovation Action
H2020-EU
2.1.5.2.—Technologies enabling
energy-efficient systems and
energy-efficient buildings with
low environmental impact
EU H2020-LC-EEB-03-2019:
New developments in
plus-energy houses
6.9 million Euro

B. Management and Partners
Coordinator

NTNU: research institute; with
SINTEF as main research
partner

NTNU: research institute; cities
for city demo site coordination

NTNU: research institute with
SINTEF as part of consortium

Partners

32 Norwegian partners

11 Norwegian and 21
international partners

Background of Partners

Partners from whole value
chain within construction sector,
plus-energy sector and
municipalities, research

Research, public sector, energy,
digital technology, engagement
and outreach, planning, real
estate, mobility

3 Norwegian and 10
international partners
Property developers, urban
design consultancies, energy
forecasting and optimization
solutions, real estate/facility
management, research

Role of Partners

Active; but partners are not
obligated to fulfil activities;
Steering Committee led by
partners

Active; partners are jointly
working on specific tasks for
project objectives

Active; partners are jointly
working on specific tasks for
project objectives

C. Project Goals and Approach
Project Goal

Framework and methodology
for Zero Emission
Neighbourhoods

Focus

Emission reduction in the built
environment, energy systems
and energy flexibility,
introduction of new technology
solutions to marked

Greenhouse Gas (GHG)
Emissions

Assessed in all life-cycle phases

Design, deployment, testing,
replication of PEBs/PEDs and
PEB-enabling innovations
Urban transitions, emission
reduction, energy transition,
local energy systems, Open
Innovation, co-creation,
sustainable business models,
regulatory mechanisms
Assessed in operational phase
of the demo sites

Replication and upscaling of
SPENS; 10% market uptake of
plus energy houses by 2030
Development of new designs,
tools, methods, and processes
which will enable large
deployment of sustainable plus
energy buildings and
neighborhoods
Total GHG is part of its
environmental performance
indicators in the overall SPEN
evaluation framework

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

9 of 21

Table 1. Cont.
Category

ZEN

+CityxChange

syn.ikia

D. Implementation
Demo Sites

9 demo sites in 8 Norwegian
Cities

Coordinator of Demo
Sites

(Mainly) public steered demo
sites

2 PEB demo sites in Trondheim,
Norway; 6 international demo
sites
Public and private steered demo
sites

1 demo site in Oslo, Norway
and 3 international demo sites
Private steered demo site

Presentation of the Demo Sites for PED Implementation in Norway
The three cases include twelve demo sites in Norway (Figure 2). Each demo site
constitutes a unit of analysis and is presented in detail in Table 2 below.

Figure 2. Units of analysis: 12 PED sites in Norway (source: authors’ own, with open map files
from Kartverket).

While all PED projects in the respective demo sites are aiming to become positive
energy, either on an annual basis or over their lifetime, for each of the demo sites, an individual approach towards the PED concept, in general, and the energy system, specifically,
is chosen, building on, e.g., reducing energy demand, energy flexibility and renewable
energy production [53]. As the majority of demo sites are in the planning and construction
phase, and several have been interrupted or altered since the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic, it is not possible to report actual or estimates of energy consumption for all
demo sites in a meaningful way for comparison.
As an initial estimate, the two +CityxChange demo sites are expected to have around
a 3.2 GWh per year consumption that should be covered by renewables. Detailed numbers
will be published in future Deliverables. Within ZEN, the yearly energy consumption is
estimated for Ydalir with around 8 GWh, Fornebu with 4 GWh.

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

10 of 21

Table 2. Overview of the 12 Norwegian PED demo sites across the 3 cases (ZEN, +CityxChange and syn.ikia).

Demo Site

Project

Type of Area
before PED
Development

Area Size (m2 )

Project Owner

Ydalir, Elverum

ZEN

Brownfield

430,000

Public

Furuset, Oslo

ZEN

Mixed-use
neighborhood with
local center

870,000

Public

Zero Village
Bergen (ZVB),
Bergen

ZEN

Greenfield

378,000

Private

NTNU Campus,
Trondheim

ZEN

University
Campus

339,031

Public

Sluppen,
Trondheim

ZEN,
+CxC

Mixed use area,
mainly commercial

275,000

Private (+CxC),
Public (ZEN)

Brattøra,
Trondheim

+CxC

Former harbor,
mainly commercial
and offices

450,000

Private (for site)/
Public (for
neighborhood
level)

Evenstad Campus

ZEN

University
Campus

61,000

Public

New City-New
Airport, Bodø

ZEN

Former airport

3,400,000

Public

Fornebu, Bærum

ZEN

Former airport

3,400,000

Public

Mære, Steinkjer

ZEN

Agricultural school

18,000 (Gross
building area)

Public

Oen, Oslo

syn.ikia

Residential
building

12,750 (Gross
building area)

Private

Planned Construction
Residential area with a
school and kindergarten
Retrofitting/upgrading
and new construction:
1700–2300 dwellings and
2000–3400 workplaces
(up to 160,000 m2 )
Residential area with
720 dwellings
(92,000 m2 ), a
kindergarten and
additional service
functions
Retrofitting and new
construction (ca.
136,000 m2 )
Multifunctional local
center with a mobility
hub, residential area,
offices, warehouses; incl.
retrofitting and new
construction
Powerhouse office
building completed,
further (re) development
upcoming, mobility hub
with future e-ferries
Optimization of energy
system
Multifunctional city
quarter with residential
and business areas; 2800
dwellings in first
construction stage
Multifunctional city
quarter, ca. 265,000 m2
existing building stock,
ca. 3700 new dwellings
Optimization of energy
system and control
New residential
building with 146
housing units with
sharing of community
spaces, RES, local energy
storage, peak shaving,
flexibility and
self-consumption

To summarize the review of demo sites (Table 2), great variation was found between
the types of projects, size and planned construction covering both existing areas and
new buildings with multiple functions. The areas for PED development range from
12,750 square meters of a residential site to 3,400,000 square meters of multi-functional
city quarters. Moreover, approximately two-thirds of the projects, primarily from ZEN,
are owned by public sector partners, and one-third, including +CityxChange and syn.ikia,

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

11 of 21

by the private sector. The demos are highly shaped by project aims and their respective
funding programs from 2017 to 2024 (Table 1), giving opportunity to learn from early
experiences and deepen approaches to social innovation.
4.2. Approaches towards Social Innovation
The social innovation and participation dimensions concern the integration of citizens
in innovation and urban transformation processes spurring PED development. The approaches to such integration differed across the three projects in their orientations to citizen
involvement, stakeholder interaction and capacity building, education and learning. These
three areas were selected based on the results in Section 2. We present the findings of our
multiple case study on social innovation in this section. The key results of the comparison
between the three PED approaches on social innovation are highlighted in Table 3 and are
described in detail in the subsections that follow.
Table 3. Social innovation approaches within the three cases of PEDs in Norway.
Dimension

ZEN

+CityxChange

Citizen Involvement

Focus on technical innovation,
bottom-up approach for social
innovation in demo sites,
citizen participation facilitated
by project partners

Focus on technical and social
innovation, citizen
participation facilitated
through the project

Stakeholder Interaction

Open innovation driven by
consortium partners and local
stakeholders related to each
demo site. Prominent role of
public sector as main demo
site project owner (8 of 9 demo
sites are public owned)

Open innovation activities are
driven by multiple
stakeholders (public, research,
private incl. SMEs, people)

Professional capacity building

Community capacity building,
professional capacity building
through intra-project
exchanges, education through
universities

Capacity Building,
Education and Learning

syn.ikia
Focus on demonstrating
innovations and savings going
from a building level to a
neighborhood scale to
encourage a new level of
citizens’ participation and
awareness via neighborhood
scale user engagement systems,
user journey assessments
and surveys
Open innovation driven by
consortium partners, local
stakeholders related to each
demo site and the development
of a wider online stakeholder
community to engage partners
in different parts of the
value chain
Capacity building is directed
towards, not just end users, but
actors in the combined value
chain, hence extending to a
diverse audience of experts,
professionals and policy makers,
such as investors, developers,
municipalities, grid operators
and utilities, and
building owners

4.2.1. Citizen Involvement
The ZEN Centre is oriented to assisting partners in overcoming the traditional problems of citizen involvement. Social innovation is facilitated in living labs for experimentation with end-users and citizens [54]. There is, in general, a strong focus on technical
innovation (e.g., across sectors) rather than social innovation. Nevertheless, the variety of
ZEN demo sites across Norway present opportunities for social innovation, as they give
insights on transformation processes and different stakeholder configurations in various
regional contexts.
An example for realizing social innovation across sectors of energy and urban planning
was given by the demo site of Ydalir. The construction of the subsurface pipe system for
district heating in the neighborhood was combined with the construction of a walking

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

12 of 21

pathway above surface, connecting the demo site to the nearby city center in a shorter and
more attractive way. This was an example for effective and early stakeholder collaboration
between energy and urban planning actors. The collaboration was achieved through
the facilitation of a series of workshops at the beginning of the planning phase of the
project [55].
In +CityxChange, social innovation and citizen participation have taken a central place
in the design of the project. PEDs are co-created with stakeholders and are intended to be
open to social innovations that may shape their development, to the extent possible within
the framework of a H2020 program. There is a dedicated work package on co-creation and
community participation, which develops frameworks and tools for community-oriented
activities. Amongst others, learning frameworks, playbooks, innovation playgrounds
and living labs are included [56,57]. The participating cities use these to adapt and test
new approaches.
In syn.ikia, the citizens are more occupants, residents and end-users. End-user involvement is planned in the development of a neighborhood scale user engagement system
to facilitate the utilization of ‘energy plus’ systems from the building level to the neighborhood level focusing on the end-users in the value chain (i.e., households). This is
anticipated to encourage a new level of citizens’ participation and awareness. In addition,
a planned initiative is to conduct a post occupancy evaluation at the neighborhood scale,
and a user journey assessment will also be prioritized to enhance user involvement and
satisfaction. Surveys will be undertaken targeting the demo case residents to get insights
on all aspects relating to energy and their behavior, feelings and actions in making the
transition from a consumer to a prosumer.
4.2.2. Stakeholder Interaction
This dimension looks at co-creation and open innovation, particularly from the public
sector perspective. The SET Plan foresees a need for a structured, integrated and innovative
approach embedded in the city’s overall vision, which depends on the involvement of all
relevant stakeholders. Public authorities are typically the gatekeepers and coordinators
of the approach, due to their legal powers over land use, planning and infrastructure.
Recognizing a need for open innovation pipelines to support PEDs from research to market
and society, leadership in the public sector is essential. This can be achieved through cocreation and participatory processes, public sector innovation and procurement practices
that encourage stakeholder participation and innovation. We compared the approaches to
innovation and role of the public sector across the three projects.
The ZEN Centre is characterized by open innovation driven by mainly the public
sector within the demo sites and following an experimental approach to PED deployment.
Besides the demo sites, the project uses living labs as an additional method for involving
stakeholders. Eight of nine demo sites are publicly owned and coordinated by public
sector at this early stage of development. Being the earliest of the three PED projects, this
has led to early learnings for stakeholder involvement and co-creation in the Norwegian
context. Following these early processes, it was observed that integration between different
governmental levels and its stakeholders, e.g., municipal and regional public bodies, is crucial. For example, a missing awareness of existing governance structures and the need for
collaboration between different hierarchical policy structures held the Zero Village Bergen
project on hold for many years [22]. In the specific local contexts of the demos, the roles and
responsibilities of coordinating actors were not always clear to all involved stakeholders,
and it was necessary to ‘muddle through’ to find the right cross-sectoral and administrative
points for cooperation. A variety of approaches towards coordination of PED projects
in the demo sites was found, such as the local land development agency in Ydalir, and
the creation of a municipal inter-departmental working group for PED development in
the demo site in Bodø. Different background, experiences and responsibilities of project
coordinators led to diverse approaches towards stakeholder involvement in the PED project
development. A specific challenge was identified in multi-owned demo sites, where a

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

13 of 21

multitude of stakeholders are involved and need to be orchestrated towards successful PED
development. The ZEN Centre focuses on technical aspects of PEDs and dedicates some
resources to the development and deployment of co-creation methodologies. Specifically,
the definition for ZEN under development is incorporating more aspects towards process
design and stakeholder involvement, including citizen participation.
+CityxChange demonstrates open innovation driven by multiple stakeholders [58,59]
including co-creation with the public and private sector (e.g., energy providers, industry
partners, SMEs) and strong citizen engagement. Innovation is deliberate in as much as
the impacts of a H2020 project must be foreseen, but it is also left open via the strategy of
co-creation adopted by the project. The project adopts a Bold City Vision (BCV) strategic
alignment approach that integrates PED related principles and energy goals into the city’s
urban development plans and processes and vice versa. For example, through the BCV
implementation, the municipality of Trondheim aims to link and scale learnings up to city
processes [59].
Co-creation also entails significant citizen engagement and education to increase
awareness and acceptance of PEDs, which is deemed necessary for replication. Living
Labs are deployed as sites for community interaction and urban prototyping to foster open
innovation. In Trondheim, four City Labs make the urban living lab approach tangible,
under the concept of city-wide innovation playgrounds, open to the public and managed
by the municipality and private partners. +CityxChange PEDs are developed in existing
areas, requiring stakeholder constellations of cooperation. Co-creation is adopted as a
strategy to support the process.
As a H2020 Innovation Action project, syn.ikia operates on an open innovation principle. Stakeholders are identified on different levels such as consortium level, local demo
site level and a wider online stakeholder community (SPEN community) level. On a
consortium level, the stakeholder interaction is addressed via a dedicated work package
on innovation management and exploitation to track key exploitable results generated
by consortium partners systematically. On a local demo site level, the Norwegian demo
site, like syn.ikia’s other three demo sites in Spain, Netherlands and Austria, serves as a
co-creation hub for developing and testing of novel systems, technologies and processes
for achieving sustainable plus energy houses at the neighborhood scale in the sub-arctic
climatic type in Europe. This involves the local value chain actors in which the demo site is
embedded. As for the wider online stakeholder community level that will comprise PED
experts and practitioners, it is envisaged that the SPEN community will be instrumental in
providing exposure and promoting the innovations coming from syn.ikia.
4.2.3. Capacity Building, Education and Training
While the three cases try to reach out to enhance capacities through knowledge transfer,
experience, education, and training among a broad number of stakeholders, we identified a
main target group within the three specific projects where most of the efforts were allocated.
The ZEN Centre focuses on capacity building among professional stakeholders, both
individual and organizational, in Norway along the construction value chain, including
relevant sectors of energy. Through partner meetings and both academic and popularscience presentations at professional meetings, e.g., the Norwegian annual meeting of
building physics or the two-annual ZEN conference, knowledge from the ZEN Centre is
spread to its partners and abroad. Some partners involved are associations, such as the
Norwegian District and Heating Association, who represents a broad number of industry
partners within district heating, and who use their respective information channel to
inform and build up competencies. In addition, knowledge is published through relevant
publication channels, such as SINTEF Building Research Design Guides, to reach out
to a broad number of construction companies including SMEs. Some publications and
meetings are dedicated to ZEN partners and are not open to the public. Experiences from
early-stage implementation have shown that despite the broad channels to communicate
and educate on ZEN, project partners in the demo sites report missing capacities and skills

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

14 of 21

to implement PED ambitions and technologies [51,60]. In the pilot project of Ydalir, this
challenge was addressed by a guiding booklet for the implementation of district heating
system technologies and technical installations in the buildings. At the time of writing, the
booklet was still under development by the utility company and project partners.
Activities of the ZEN Centre itself are not primarily aiming at citizen or end-user
capacity building. Experiences from the former demo site of Steinkjer, the kindergarten
of Lø, show that a missing understanding of the ZEN concept, and knowledge from that,
can put a project, or at least its higher ambitions towards climate neutrality, on hold [61].
In Steinkjer, two kindergartens should be relocated in an existing building, which should
be retrofitted following the ambitions for climate neutrality within the ZEN Centre. The
future users of the kindergarten, employees and parents perceived the ZEN ambition as
an extra burden with regard to time and resources and intervened towards the political
steering of Steinkjer, which put the project on hold. In the end, the relocation of the two
kindergartens will take place in a new building without ZEN ambitions, and, due to that
occurrence, this project is no longer part of the ZEN Centre.
In some cases, the ZEN Centre also provides training to respective users of tools
developed within it. Training of a Geographic Information System (GIS)-based tool to
evaluate spatial qualities was provided to employees of the urban planning departments
in the municipalities of Bodø and Trondheim.
Living labs are facilitated as non-permanent (urban) experiments within demo sites,
exploring end-user and citizen perspectives in relation to diverse ZEN aspects (future
living, energy saving technology acceptance). Living labs are, therefore, designed to
inform, consult, involve and educate end-users and other relevant stakeholders in ZEN. As
the ZEN Centre is hosted by NTNU, and a broad number of teaching staff is part of the
ZEN Centre, several student courses are dedicated to specific ZEN aspects, for instance,
life-cycle assessment (LCA) or sustainability design with low emissions and using ZEN
demo sites as case studies during courses and master theses across different fields.
The focus of ZEN on the planning and design phase reflects the status of several of
the demo sites, which are covering planning and design for PEDs, as well as early-stage
implementation, both in building and infrastructure areas. This broad range of demo sites
in different phases of development as well as different contexts, from urban to rural or
project size, offers the possibility for a broad comparison and learning between different
PED developments. Experience sharing and knowledge transfer between demo sites is
facilitated through annual meetings of the demo sites partners.
+CityxChange is reaching out to foster community competencies and to educate the
next generation of smart citizens, with learning activities targeted to elemental and higher
education. Information and engagement of citizens is facilitated through engagement and
participation tools, such as the citizen engagement playbooks, innovation playgrounds and
labs, next generation of smart citizens activities and learning frameworks. Four physical
City Labs are established in different neighborhoods of Trondheim for connecting the
municipality (and other stakeholders) with the community, to include local innovation
ecosystems and to make the City-as-a-living-lab approach tangible. +CityxChange furthermore organizes regular learning sessions for its partners, as well as storytelling workshops
with external stakeholders and decision makers. These serve as a form of capacity building
and exchange of experiences between partners, and some are also open to the wider public,
especially to related H2020 projects. Topics of +CityxChange and the project as a case study
are also part of education activities of the participating universities. +CityxChange will
also become a pilot for better integration between innovation, research and education on
the UN Sustainable Development Goal 11 (Sustainable cities and communities) in a new
Erasmus+-funded project ENHANCE (https://enhanceuniversity.eu/) (accessed on 19
May 2021).
In syn.ikia, capacity building is planned for at least two target groups: occupants and
end-users, as well as actors in the combined value chain of the built environment and that
of the residential energy. It is planned to implement training for occupants and end-users so

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

15 of 21

that they are able to use the new technologies efficiently. Furthermore, there will be regular
monitoring of usage patterns and user comfort in the in-use phase. Beyond end-users,
syn.ikia will disseminate SPEN concepts, technologies and solutions to the actors in the
combined value chain via the demo site and via the online SPEN community. In this way,
capacity building is directed towards a diverse audience of experts, professionals and
policy makers, such as, investors, developers, municipalities, grid operators and utilities
and building owners.
5. Discussion
In order to explore social innovation in PED projects and learning from the Norwegian
experiences, we discuss the findings in terms of the two research questions.
What is the variety of social innovation approaches in planning and early implementation of
PED projects in Norway?
All three projects are driving social innovations, albeit with different scope and extent.
Comparison showed that +CityxChange, as a smart cities project, has a wide scope for
urban transformation and societal transition incorporating social innovation. This leaves
room for significant co-creation activities with citizens amongst other stakeholder groups.
As the main focus of the ZEN Centre lays on technical innovations within the whole value
chain of the construction industry in alignment with the energy sector, social innovation
and involvement of citizens and users is mainly facilitated by the project partners in the
demo sites.
Syn.ikia balances technological innovation with social innovation by focusing on
occupants, residents and end-users (using tools such as co-design, neighborhood scale user
engagement system, post occupancy evaluation at the neighborhood scale, user journey
assessment and surveys) and by combining the perspectives of existing and emerging
actors in the combined value chain of the built environment and that of residential energy.
It operates open innovation at three levels to maximize impact—demo site, consortium
and beyond-consortium level—and aims to stimulate stakeholder interaction at these three
levels. Its approach to capacity building and promoting social inclusion centers, not only
on end-users, but also on involving a diversity of actors, core and peripheral, via an online
SPEN community to embark on the energy transition.
Social innovation occurs through both external activities to the projects (i.e., indirectly)
and internalized ones embedded in project structures (i.e., directly). This raises awareness
about where to locate responsibilities and practices for social innovation according to the
project context.
The public sector plays a necessary role in the demo sites of +CityxChange, ZEN Centre
and syn.ikia in integrating PEDs into urban development planning, policy and processes
on multiple governmental levels. The provisions under the Planning and Building Act
can pose significant challenges for private developers. Thereby, we identified that for
many of the demo sites for PED deployment, there is a public project owner for the whole
development or coordination, though sometimes one or multiple building owners take
that role, for example, in Zero Village Bergen or in +CityxChange. The scope and degree of
stakeholder engagement and sharing the initiative for PED uptake, nevertheless, varies
widely. Looking at the differences between the three projects, we identified variation
within the ZEN Centre alone, as multiple demo sites were shown to vary based on the
local contexts, shaping different stakeholder constellations and ways of ‘getting things
done’. The comparison of all projects shows the local adaptation of approaches, even as
they follow similar concepts, which is in line with the stated importance of local context
for PED development [24,41,51]. Furthermore, we identified the importance of innovative
approaches within stakeholder engagement across sectors and stakeholder groups to
appropriately address the complexity of PED projects. Additionally, the scope and focus
group for capacity building varied between the three projects.
While this study focused on projects in the Norwegian context, there are other projects
with Nordic or European sites, building upon the policy framework already presented

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

16 of 21

in Section 2. Newly published studies do compare PED projects without taking social
innovation approaches into consideration but, at the same time, highlight the importance of
stakeholder involvement, citizen participation and capacity building as important elements
for PED deployment [24,37,40,41]. An international comparison would contribute to a
deeper understanding of social innovation’s role in PED development, but is outside the
scope of this paper.
The variety of social innovation approaches in PED development in the Norwegian
projects analyzed in this paper could also be seen under a broader light of a Nordic model,
much akin to the developments on the city scale. Further research could analyze the
commonalities and differences with other regional PED projects. Here, the insights and
experiences of both +CityxChange and syn.ikia, which include other European demo
sites, would add richness to the ongoing work in developing a PED database, to which
researchers in PED international forums, such as COST Action Positive Energy Districts
European Network and IEA EBC Annex 83 Positive Energy Districts, are contributing.
What are the learnings to guide future PED developments in social innovations?
The three types of projects reviewed here show strong similarity in making social
innovation issues a priority in their work. Within that, they demonstrate variations which
can partly be traced to the calls and funding schemes establishing the scopes of projects,
and partly seem to be due to varying approaches, site selections and local contexts. Comparing these projects at an early stage gives us the possibility to reflect on the applied
and envisioned approaches towards social innovation as a complementary effort to their
technical innovation in the PEDs and derive some learning and practical guidance. As a
limitation, given the early stages, we cannot yet draw on actual evaluation and, thus, base
this part on the selected and used methods in the projects so far.
Taken together, planning and early implementation of PEDs in our cases demonstrated
a plethora of potential social innovation activities that can be realized in specific local
contexts and stakeholder configurations, using a variety of methods from living labs,
workshops and innovation playgrounds. The analysis has shown that social innovation
builds on the three pillars of stakeholder involvement, citizen participation and capacity
building in a more dynamic way, as presented in Figure 1. The experiences from Norwegian
demo sites identified dynamic interactions between these pillars, that evolves over time.
We have learned that to enable a successful deployment of PEDs, capacity building, education and training should include all relevant stakeholders, professional and
citizens/end-users of buildings and infrastructure, and especially key personnel responsible for citizen involvement and capacity building, in the respective demo sites. Stakeholders, and especially key personnel, developing knowledge, skills and experiences with
respect to stakeholder engagement, citizen participation and capacity building will enable
them to orchestrate social innovation in a more directed and efficient way over time. Raising knowledge about the local context of PED development and its specific needs, drivers
and challenges will contribute to better capacities towards social innovation. Through
evolving capacities on orchestrating capacity building, stakeholder involvement and citizen
participation, social innovation’s role will change over time to be an enabler for exploration
and deployment of PEDs in alignment with technological innovation (see Figure 3).
With regard to stakeholder involvement, we see a strong interaction with citizen
participation, as learnings from the Norwegian demo sites have shown citizen participation
to be an integrative part of stakeholder involvement that should be guaranteed and facilitated both in early phases of PED development, and in later deployment and operation
phases. Widening the scope of stakeholder interaction and enabling continuous co-creation
processes that include citizens will contribute to adaptive cycles of PED exploration and
deployment. Additionally, this touches a major challenge in society nowadays, as the
integrative PED concept relates to different sectors and stakeholders involved, such as
policy makers, PED developers, operators and civil society, whose presence and influence
vary over time. The PED concept, therefore, asks for a governance model that steers and

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

17 of 21

manages social innovation activities over time, from early planning to operation, in a
holistic way.

Figure 3. Model of transformative change in PED socio-technical system through social innovation (source: authors’ own,
based on [62,63]).

The responsibilities for stakeholder interaction towards all relevant stakeholders and
the enabling for social innovation should be identified and communicated, especially with
regard to the early involvement of citizens as future users. We consider that responsibility
can be taken by different groups according to local contexts and legal requirements and
can shift throughout the life of the project according to stage of PED development and
the evolving needs of stakeholders and citizens, specifically. At the same time, there is a
need for a structured process and common understanding of social innovation activities
incorporated in a holistic governance model over the lifetime of the PED project.
To elaborate on social innovation, methods including living labs, workshops and
innovation playgrounds are used in the three PED projects reaching out to include different stakeholder groups at different phases of PED development. The learnings of which
methods and tools are suitable, to foster social innovation for what specific context of
PEDs and the respective phase of development, are evolving. Experiences of social innovation activities from diverse PED projects can help to build an understanding of the
suitability of methods and tools in specific PED contexts and with regard to goals of social
innovation activities.
Building on our findings, we draw the picture of a more dynamic role of social
innovation in the socio-technological system of PEDs (Figure 3). Taking inspiration from
the theory of transformative agency in socio-ecological systems [62,64], each PED project
represents an adaptive cycle [63] of exploring and testing social innovation. Each iteration
of an adaptive cycle creates knowledge from successes and failures to be carried to the
next. As PED projects and their adaptive cycles progress through early experimentation to
learning and widening, and market demonstration phases, the role of social innovation
becomes more deeply embedded in project structures and the aspects of social innovation
(i.e., citizen involvement, stakeholder interaction and capacity building) mature. Social
innovation can thereby be seen as a transformative element in socio-technical systems,
“tipping towards sustainability” [64], by supporting energy transition aims indicated in the
SET Plan and other policies and programs.
6. Conclusions
This paper has analyzed the prevailing approaches towards social innovation in the
planning and early implementation of PEDs in the Norwegian context. We investigated
three projects with twelve PED demo sites in Norway in a comparative case study, capturing
the variety of approaches for social innovation so far. The results show that each of the

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

18 of 21

PED projects balanced technological solutions as well as social innovations, but in a
varied approach and scope with regard to citizen involvement, stakeholder interaction
and capacity building. Due to the early stages of the projects and demo sites, we cannot
yet evaluate specific results of these social innovation processes, but the set-up of how the
three projects address social innovation allows us to extract an overview of the variety of
practical approaches and the way context drives them.
From this broad variety of local contexts and approaches, we derive three open
questions that can be helpful in guiding future PED projects towards social innovation:

•
•

•

Who is responsible for social innovation activities over the lifetime of the PED project?
How can the responsible persons and organizations for citizen and stakeholder involvement ensure they have the capacity (abilities, knowledge, skills) to facilitate
social innovation activities within PED development and to involve, educate and train
on the new concept of PED and its practical implications?
How could the respective stakeholders, including citizens, be appropriately involved
in the PED development to enable social innovation processes?

We conclude that within the PED projects studied, no single specific approach served
or is used in all, thus there are multiple roads to PEDs. This is in line with reported
experiences from the wider European landscape of PED projects [46,47]. Nevertheless,
we see value in the variety of approaches towards PEDs in general and, accordingly,
in the variety of approaches to social innovation as specifically presented in this paper.
To accommodate variety, we developed a dynamic and evolutionary understanding of
social innovation in PEDs based on the knowledge gained in each iteration that enables
a deepening role of various social innovation aspects in PED projects. From our specific
cases, this study guides the reader towards possible approaches and solutions based on
project context and the maturity of social innovation in the local system.
To enable a successful energy transition towards climate neutral and socially inclusive
cities, the PED concept and its definition, as well as the practical deployment of PED
projects, asks for a balanced approach incorporating technical and social innovation simultaneously, in order to enable broad citizen and stakeholder involvement activities through
the whole lifetime of the project. Stakeholders involved in future planning of PED projects
within Norway and internationally can plan around these three questions to consider a
multitude of options for addressing social innovation processes and outcomes when setting
up a PED project, drawing inspiration from the reviewed Norwegian projects.
The approaches to social innovation, in part, fulfil programmatic requirements at
national and international levels, while being founded in theory to differing degrees. Since
the PED projects run as experiments for social and technical innovation, they also allow
deeper analysis of the results of these approaches. The theoretical basis for social innovation particular to Norwegian PED development, can be strengthened through continued
analysis during each project’s progression. Further work should follow the implementation
approaches on the demo site level to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of social innovation approaches. This would offer further comprehensive insights and capture learnings
from these PED projects for robust cross-country comparisons and foster further dialogue
in the evolution of the PED concept and its European and international development.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.B., B.L., C.C., J.T., D.A.; methodology, B.L., C.C., D.B.;
analysis, D.B., B.L., C.C., J.T., D.A.; writing—original draft preparation, D.B., B.L., C.C., J.T., D.A.,
A.T.-S., A.W.; writing—review and editing, D.B., B.L., C.C., D.A.; visualization, B.L., D.B, C.C.;
supervision, D.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The research leading to these results has been partly performed in the Research Centre
on Zero Emission Neighbourhoods in Smart Cities (FME ZEN), funded by the Research Council of
Norway [Norges forskningsrådet] under Grant Agreement No. 257660 and partners. The APC was
funded by Research Council of Norway [Norges forskningsrådet] under Grant Agreement No. 257660.
Part of this work has been performed within the +CityxChange (Positive City ExChange) project
under the Smart Cities and Communities topic that has received funding from the European Union’s

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

19 of 21

Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under Grant Agreement No. 824260; and within
the syn.ikia project that received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program under Grant Agreement No. 841850.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We gratefully acknowledge the partners through the Research Centre on Zero
Emission Neighbourhoods in Smart Cities (FME ZEN), the partners of the +CityxChange (Positive
City ExChange) project, and the partners of the syn.ikia project.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors are partly working in or with the projects discussed here, have
received funding through these projects, and partly hold leadership positions or are technical
contributors to activities within these projects.

Abbreviations
EU
FME
GHG
GIS
H2020
JPI UE
NTNU
PEB
PED
RCN
SET
SPEN
ZEN

European Union
Research Centres for Environmentally Friendly Energy [Forskningssenter for Miljøvennlig
Energi]
Greenhouse Gas
Geographic Information System
Horizon 2020—the eighth European framework programme for Research and Innovation
Joint Programming Initiative Urban Europe
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Positive Energy Block
Positive Energy District
Research Council of Norway
Strategic Energy Transition
Sustainable Positive Energy Neighbourhood
Zero Emission Neighbourhood

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.

12.
13.

European Commission. Smart Cities and Communities. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/
opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-details/lc-sc3-scc-1-2018-2019-2020 (accessed on 1 April 2021).
Jank, R. Annex 51: Case studies and guidelines for energy efficient communities. Energy Build. 2017, 154, 529–537. [CrossRef]
Bhowmik, A.K.; McCaffrey, M.S.; Ruskey, A.M.; Frischmann, C.; Gaffney, O. Powers of 10: Seeking ‘sweet spots’ for rapid climate
and sustainability actions between individual and global scales. Environ. Res. Lett. 2020, 15. [CrossRef]
Hellström, T. Innovation as social action. Organization 2004, 11, 631–649. [CrossRef]
Arnkil, R.; Järvensivu, A.; Koski, P.; Piirainen, T. Exploring Quadruple Helix. Outlining User-Oriented Innovation Models. University
of Tampere Working Papers 85/20120; University of Tampere: Tampere, Finland, 2018. Available online: https://trepo.tuni.fi/
bitstream/handle/10024/65758/978-951-44-8209-0.pdf (accessed on 15 February 2021).
Kriz, A.; Bankins, S.; Molloy, C. Readying a Region: Temporally Exploring the Development of an Australian Regional Quadruple
Helix. R D Manag. 2018, 48, 25–43. [CrossRef]
Diepenmaat, H.; Kemp, R.; Velter, M. Why sustainable development requires societal innovation and cannot be achieved without
this. Sustainability 2020, 12, 1270. [CrossRef]
Halonen, M.; Persson, Å.; Sepponen, S. Sustainable Development Action–the Nordic Way: Implementation of the Global 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development in Nordic Cooperation; Nordic Council of Ministers: Copenhagen, Denmark, 2017.
Nordic Council of Ministers. A Good Life in a Sustainable Nordic Region: Nordic Strategy for Sustainable Development 2013–2025;
Nordic Council of Ministers: Copenhagen, Denmark, 2019.
JPI Urban Europe/ SET Plan Action 3.2. White Paper on Reference Framework for Positive Energy Districts and Neighbourhoods.
Key Lessons from National Consultations. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/app/uploads/2020/04/White-PaperPED-Framework-Definition-2020323-final.pdf (accessed on 13 February 2021).
Wyckmans, A.; Karatzoudi, K.; Brigg, D.; Ahlers, D. D9.5: Report on Attendance at Events Held by Other SCC-01 Co-Ordinators 2.
+CityxChange Project Deliverable D9.5. 2019. Available online: https://cityxchange.eu/knowledge-base/report-on-attendanceat-events-held-by-other-scc-01-co-ordinators-2/ (accessed on 13 February 2021).
Lindholm, O.; Rehman, H.; Reda, F. Positioning Positive Energy Districts in European cities. Buildings 2021, 11, 19. [CrossRef]
SET Plan Action 3.2. Implementation Plan related to Positive Energy Districts (PED). Available online: https://setis.ec.europa.
eu/actions-towards-implementing-integrated-set-plan/implementation-plans (accessed on 5 March 2021).

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

42.
43.

20 of 21

Ogburn, W.F.; Meyer, F.N. Sociology, 4th ed.; Riverside Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1964.
Cajaiba-Santana, G. Social innovation: Moving the field forward: A conceptual framework. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2014, 82,
42–50. [CrossRef]
Angelidou, M.; Psaltoglou, A. An empirical investigation of social innovation initiatives for sustainable urban development.
Sustain. Cities Soc. 2017, 33, 113–125. [CrossRef]
Manzini, E. Making things happen: Social innovation and design. Des. Issues 2014, 30, 57–66. [CrossRef]
Clemente, C.; Civiero, P.; Cellurale, M. Positive Energy Districts (PEDs) for inclusive and sustainable urban development. Sustain.
Mediterr. Constr. 2020, 12, 112–119.
Carayannis, E.G.; Campell, D.F.J. Mode 30 and ‘quadruple Helix’: Toward a 21st century fractal innovation ecosystem. Int. J.
Technol. Manag. 2009, 46, 201–234. [CrossRef]
Gohari, S. Governance in the Planning and Decision-Making Process. The Co-Location Case of University Campuses in Trondheim.
Ph.D. Thesis, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, 2019.
Lindkvist, C.M.; Juhasz-Nagy, E.; Nielsen, B.F.; Neumann, H.-M.; Lobaccaro, G.; Wyckmans, A. Intermediaries for knowledge
transfer in integrated energy planning of urban districts. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2018, 142, 354–363. [CrossRef]
Gohari, S.; Larssæther, S. Sustainable energy planning as a co-creative governance challenge. Lessons from the Zero Village
Bergen. Int. J. Sustain. Energy Plan. Manag. 2019, 24, 147–154.
Gustafsson, S.; Mignon, I. Municipalities as intermediaries for the design and local implementation of climate visions. Eur. Plan.
Stud. 2020, 28, 1161–1182. [CrossRef]
Ahlers, D.; Alpagut, B.; Cerna, V.; Cimini, V.; Haxhija, S.; Hukkalainen, M.; Kuzmic, M.; Livik, K.; Padilla, M. SCIS EU Smart
Cities Information System. EU Smart Cities Information System. Positive Energy Districts Solution Booklet; Vandevyvere, H., Ed.; 2020.
Available online: https://smartcity-atelier.eu/app/uploads/Solution-Booklet-Positive-Energy-Districts.pdf (accessed on 27 May
2021).
Simonofski, A.; Serral Asensio, E.; Wautelet, Y. Citizen participation in the design of smart cities: Methods and management
framework. In Smart Cities: Issues and Challenges: Mapping Political Social and Economic Risks and Threats; Visvizi, A., Lytras, M.D.,
Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2019.
Dameri, R.P.; Rosenthal-Sabroux, C. Smart city and value creation. In Smart City: How to Create Public and Economic Value with
High Technology in Urban Space; Dameri, R., Rosenthal-Sabroux, C., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2014; pp. 1–12.
Hollands, R.G. Will the real smart city please stand up? City 2008, 12, 303–320. [CrossRef]
Arnstein, S.R.A. Ladder of citizen participation. AIP J. 1969, 35, 216–224. [CrossRef]
Cardullo, P.; Kitchin, R. Being a ‘citizen’ in the smart city: Up and down the scaffold of smart citizen participation in Dublin,
Ireland. GeoJournal 2019, 84, 1–13. [CrossRef]
Simonofski, A.; Serral Asensio, E.; De Smedt, J.; Snoeck, M. Hearing the voice of citizens in smart city design: The citivoice
framework. Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2019, 61, 665–678. [CrossRef]
Temeljotov Salaj, A.; Gohari, S.; Senior, C.; Xue, Y.; Lindkvist, C.M. An interactive tool for citizens’ involvement in the sustainable
regeneration. Facilities 2020, 38, 859–870. [CrossRef]
Ku, H.B.; Yuen-Tsang, A.W.K. Capacity building. In The Sage Handbook of Governance; Bevir, M., Ed.; SAGE: Thousand Oaks, USA,
2013; pp. 469–843. [CrossRef]
Farazmand, A. Innovation in strategic human resource management: Building capacity in the age of globalization. Public Organ.
Rev. 2004, 4, 3–24. [CrossRef]
Jensen, J.B.; Krogstrup, H.K. Capacity Building in the Public Sector; Aalborg University: Aalborg, Denmark, 2017.
Pretty, J. Assets-based agriculture: A new model for sustainability thinking and practice. In International Symposium on Society and
Natural Resources; University of Queensland: Brisbane, Australia, 1999; pp. 7–10.
Jackson, L. Contemporary public involvement: Toward a strategic approach. Local Environ. 2001, 62, 135–147. [CrossRef]
Brozovsky, J.; Gustavsen, A.; Gaitani, N. Zero Emission Neighbourhoods and Positive Energy Districts–A State-of-the-Art Review.
Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021, 72, 103013. [CrossRef]
Mohareb, E.A.; Kennedy, C.A. Scenarios of technology adoption towards low carbon cities. Energy Policy 2014, 66, 685–693.
[CrossRef]
Hoppe, T.; De Vries, G. Social innovation and the energy transition. Sustainability 2019, 11, 141. [CrossRef]
Bossi, S.; Gollner, C.; Theierling, S. Towards 100 Positive Energy Districts in Europe: Preliminary Data Analysis of 61 European
Cases. Energies 2020, 13, 6083. [CrossRef]
JPI Urban Europe. Europe towards Positive Energy Districts. A Compilation of Projects towards Sustainable Urbanization and
the Energy Transition. 2020. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/PED-Booklet-UpdateFeb-2020_2.pdf (accessed on 25 May 2021).
Mahoney, J.; Rueschemeyer, D. Comparative Historical Analysis: Achievements and agendas. In Comparative Historical Analysis in
the Social Sciences; Mahoney, J., Rueschemeyer, D., Eds.; Cambridge University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
Hopkin, J. The comparative method. In Theory and Methods in Political Science, 3rd ed.; Marsh, D., Stoker, G., Eds.; Palgrave
Macmillan: Houndmills, Basingstoke, United Kingdom, 2010.

Sustainability 2021, 13, 7362

44.

45.
46.
47.

48.

49.

50.

51.
52.

53.
54.
55.
56.
57.

58.

59.

60.

61.
62.
63.
64.

21 of 21

Norwegian Ministries. Norway: Initial Steps towards the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda: Voluntary National Review Presented
at the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF); United Nations: New York, NY, USA, 2016. Available
online: https://www.regjeringen.no/globalassets/departementene/ud/vedlegg/utvikling/sdg_rapport_ny2.pdf (accessed
on 21 February 2021).
Copus, A.; Perjo, L.; Berlina, A.; Jungsberg, L.; Randall, L.; Sigurjónsdóttir, H. Social Innovation in Local Development: Lessons from
the Nordic Countries and Scotland; Nordregio Work. Pap. 2; Nordregio: Stockholm, Sweden, 2017.
Ahlers, D.; Driscoll, P.; Löfström, E.; Krogstie, J.; Wyckmans, A. Understanding smart cities as social machines. In Proceedings of
the 25th International Conference Companion on World Wide Web, Montréal, Québec, Canada, 11–15 April 2016. [CrossRef]
Royal Norwegian Ministry of Petroleum and Energy. Consultation on the review of Directive 2012/27/EU on Energy Efficiency.
2016. Available online: https://www.regjeringen.no/contentassets/ca446f4845bf473ea3ae82d1bb63454d/consultation-on-thereview-of-energy-efficiency-directive.pdf (accessed on 13 August 2020).
Norwegian Government. Update of Norway’s Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement. 2020. Available
online: https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocuments/Norway%20First/Norway_updatedNDC_2020%20
(accessed on 23 May 2021).
Klausen, J.E.; Arnesen, S.; Christensen, D.A.; Folkestad, B.; Hanssen, G.S.; Winsvold, M.; Aars, J. Medvirkning Med Virkning?
Innbyggermedvirkning i den Kommunale Beslutningsprosessen. Samarbeidsrapport NIBR/Uni Rokkansenteret; Norsk institutt for by- og
regionforskning: Oslo, Norway, 2013.
Wiik, M.R.K.; Fufa, S.M.; Baer, D.; Sartori, I.; Andresen, I. The ZEN Definition–A Guideline for the ZEN Pilot Areas; Version 1.0. ZEN
Rep. No. 11; SINTEF Academic Press: Oslo, Norway, 2018. Available online: https://sintef.brage.unit.no/sintef-xmlui/handle/
11250/2588765 (accessed on 2 February 2021).
Baer, D.; Andresen, I. ZEN Pilot Projects. Mapping of the Pilot Projects within the Research Centre on Zero Emissions Neighbourhoods in
Smart Cities; ZEN Rep. No. 10; SINTEF Academic Press: Oslo, Norway, 2018.
Salom, J.; Tamm, M. Methodology Framework for Plus Energy Buildings and Neighbourhoods. 2020. Available online:
https://www.synikia.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/D3.1_Methodology-framework-for-Plus-Energy-Buildings-andNeighbourhoods.pdf (accessed on 23 May 2021).
Sørensen, Å.L.; Fredriksen, E.; Walnum, H.T.; Skeie, K.S.; Andresen, I. ZEN Pilot Survey–Initial Plans for Thermal and Electrical Use,
Generation, Distribution, and Storage. ZEN Memo 3; SINTEF Academic Press: Oslo, Norway, 2018.
Woods, R.; Berker, T. Living labs in a zero emission neighbourhood context. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2019, 352, 012004.
[CrossRef]
Baer, D. Tools for Stakeholder Engagement in ZEN Developments; ZEN Rep. No. 13; SINTEF Academic Press: Oslo, Norway, 2019.
Ahlers, D.; Driscoll, P.; Wibe, H.; Wyckmans, A. Co-Creation of positive energy blocks. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2019, 352.
[CrossRef]
Burón García, J.; Sánchez Mora, M. +CityxChange D3.2: Delivery of the Citizen Participation Playbook. 2020. Available online:
https://cityxchange.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/D3.2-Delivery-of-the-citizen-participation-playbook.pdf (accessed on 1
May 2021).
Wyckmans, A.; Vandevyvere, H.; Gohari, S.; Nielsen, B.; Driscoll, P.; Ahlers, D. Framework for Intra-Project Collaboration,
+CityxChange Deliverable D9.1. 2019. Available online: https://cityxchange.eu/knowledge-base/framework-for-intra-projectcollaboration/ (accessed on 27 May 2021).
Tanum, Ø.; Mjøen, K.; Berthelsen, B.O.; Reeves, K.; Næss, K.S. Framework for Bold City Vision, Guidelines, and Incentive
Schemes, SDG City Transition Framework. 2020. Available online: https://cityxchange.eu/knowledge-base/framework-forbold-city-vision-guidelines-and-incentive-schemes/ (accessed on 1 May 2021).
Baer, D.; Nielsen, B.F. Challenges and Best Practices for the planning of Zero Emission Neighborhoods and Smart Energy
Communities–the case of seven Norwegian cities. In Proceedings of the 54th ISOCARP Congress, Bodø, Norway, 1–5 October
2018; Cool Planning:Changing Climate & Our Urban Future.
Woods, R.; Andresen, I.; Skaar, C.; Berker, T. Utvikling av Pilotprosjekt i Steinkjer Kommune: Historier om «Det Gamle NRK Bygget på
Lø» og Evaluering av Prosessen. ZEN Rep. No. 16; SINTEF Academic Press: Oslo, Norway, 2019.
Westley, F.R.; Tjornbo, O.; Schultz, L.; Olsson, P.; Folke, C.; Crona, B.; Bodin, Ö. A theory of transformative agency in linked
social-ecological systems. Ecol. Soc. 2013, 18. [CrossRef]
Holling, C. Resilience of ecosystems: Local surprise and global change. In Global Change; Roederer, J.G., Malone, T.F., Eds.;
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1985; pp. 228–269, ISBN 978-0521306706.
Westley, F.; Olsson, P.; Folke, C.; Homer-Dixon, T.; Vredenburg, H.; Loorbach, D.; Thompson, J.; Nilsson, M.; Lambin, E.; Sendzimir,
J. Tipping toward sustainability: Emerging pathways of transformation. AMBIO 2011, 40. [CrossRef]

