buildings
Article

Citizens and Positive Energy Districts: Are Espoo and Leipzig
Ready for PEDs?
Zarrin Fatima 1, * , Uta Pollmer 2 , Saga-Sofia Santala 3 , Kaisa Kontu 4 and Marion Ticklen 5
1
2

3
4

5

*



Citation: Fatima, Z.; Pollmer, U.;
Santala, S.-S.; Kontu, K.; Ticklen, M.
Citizens and Positive Energy Districts:
Are Espoo and Leipzig Ready for

VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, PL 1000, 02044 VTT Espoo, Finland
Fraunhofer Center for International Management and Knowledge Economy IMW, Neumarkt 9-19,
04109 Leipzig, Germany; uta.pollmer@imw.fraunhofer.de
KONE Corporation; Keilasatama 5, 02150 Espoo, Finland; sagasofia.santala@kone.com
Citycon Corporation & Citycon Finland, Iso Omena, Piispansilta 9 A, 02230 Espoo, Finland;
Kaisa.Kontu@citycon.com
City of Espoo, P.O. Box 1, 02070 Espoo, Finland; marion.ticklen@espoo.fi
Correspondence: Zarrin.fatima@vtt.fi

Abstract: In urban transformation, no solution works without citizen support. With increasing
numbers of building technologies and large-scale urban development on its way across cities, it has
become vital to keep citizens informed, engaged, and content with the new changes. This paper looks
at citizen engagement in Espoo (Finland) and Leipzig (Germany), and it determines whether the cities
are ready for developing and implementing positive energy districts (PEDs). The authors studied the
cities’ operations and current citizen engagement methods to understand how the efforts could be
combined and improved. The analysis indicated that the city of Espoo already has a well-established
system that continuously promotes citizen engagement at various levels, and combining the available
infrastructure with company experts on citizen participation will allow Espoo to seamlessly transition
towards PEDs in the near future. The city of Leipzig has a rich experience due to several national
projects and participation in an earlier European project, which enabled the city to set clearer goals
for the future and modify existing citizen methods. As lighthouse cities, findings from Espoo and
Leipzig are also aimed at cities across Europe and beyond to boost development of PEDs together
with citizens.

PEDs? Buildings 2021, 11, 102.
https://doi.org/10.3390/

Keywords: positive energy districts; citizen; cities; participation; citizen engagement

buildings11030102
Academic Editor: Geun Young Yun
Received: 18 January 2021
Accepted: 24 February 2021
Published: 6 March 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction
1.1. What Is Citizen Engagement?
Citizen engagement is collectively defined as public participation, stakeholder involvement, co-creation, civic engagement, participatory democracy, or activism [1]. It is
also described as individual or collective behavior that focuses on determining the social
problems of a community [2–4]. A clear definition of citizen engagement does not exist,
but its true nature is the interaction between citizens and government [4].
Citizen engagement has a vital role in service delivery [5]. It is also said to be the
‘meaningful involvement of individual citizens in policy or program development.’ In
other words, citizen engagement requires an active intentional dialogue between citizens
and public decision makers [6].
Citizen participation may range from individuals participating in steering committees to partnerships with certain community groups. The Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR) claims that there is no ‘one size fits all’ approach because each organization, scenario, or audience may require differing engagement practices. Bringing citizen
voices into planning, decision-making, implementation, or evaluation processes requires
two-way communication. Hence, input must not be pursued for the sake of input, but communication has to be interactive to generate ‘informed participation’ to reach a common
goal [7].

Buildings 2021, 11, 102. https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings11030102

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

2 of 19

As cities around the world look for ways to involve their citizens in various discussions,
citizens themselves are eager to bring their ideas and concerns forward. However, in order
to have a high level of inclusive engagement, it is essential to involve a broad and an
unbiased selection of society as much as possible in the decision making processes [6].
To be able to make a true impact, citizen engagement has to be embedded in every
stage of the decision making process and be conducted with deep commitment, proper
allocated time, and co-creation interest. Merely adopting a tick-box approach or having
citizen participation at the end of the process will not have the desired result or be beneficial
for stakeholders. Citizen engagement has to be added in the ‘Bold City Vision’ and the
overall targets of the project instead of making it an add-on activity. However, it is also a
fact that municipal organizations and public servants do not have training to make citizen
engagement as effective as desired, and the municipal procedures very often do not cater
to involving citizens [6].
Nonetheless, capacity building solutions are now on the rise, e.g., in the Netherlands, a
new legal framework for spatial planning called ‘Omgevingswet’ (Environmental Law) will
soon be introduced, and it has participation and co-creation with citizens as one of the main
pillars. The new framework does not offer a specific method, but it gives municipalities the
freedom to develop their own approaches fitting to their local context [8]. The EU Joint
Research Centre leads a community of practice (CoP) on citizen engagement having plans
for a manual and online resource catalog aimed at organizations and project needs while
also continuing an annual Festival of Citizen Engagement. Additionally, the Citizen Focus
Action Cluster at the European Innovation Partnership on Smart Cities and Communities
(EIP-SCC) congregates several initiatives and actions on citizen engagement and operates
as a mutual learning and matchmaking platform [9].
1.2. The Necessity of Citizen Engagement
The question of the necessity of citizen engagement has been raised many times and
may be answered with the fact that continuous innovations do indeed impact the everyday
life of citizens while bridging many fields of urban life. A recent booklet published by
Smart Cities Information System (SCIS) emphasized that the inclusion of citizens may
help to address concerns, increases transparency about plans, and invites diversified
and vulnerable groups who might not actively participate otherwise. In parallel, it also
strengthens collaborative actions and bottom-up innovations, enhances the sense of trust
and community ownership, and develops resource efficiency as unforeseen problems may
be avoided; most importantly, citizen views can help explore more sustainable and viable
solutions that may function better in the local context [6].
The emerging trend of positive energy blocks and districts (PEBs/PEDs) is a transition
towards more energy-conscious behavior that calls for extensive and innovative engagement approaches and co-creation practices, as this will lead to citizens who understand,
trust, and use and feel ownership of the measures adopted in their district [6]. Citizen
engagement is essentially part of the quadruple helix innovation model that identifies four
major actors in the innovation system: science, policy, industry, and society [10], hence
placing a further emphasis on how participation can deliver new forms of deliberation and
operationalization of the democratic process within the city, eventually leading to higher
local impact and building citizen trust [6].
Citizen engagement has significant importance in relation to the success, development,
and implementation of PEDs. A recent publication by the European Commission [11]
described a PED as having defined borders and an area that:

•
•
•

is based on open and voluntary participation, is autonomous, and is efficiently controlled by its citizens;
has the primary purpose to deliver environmental, economic, or social community
benefits;
has an overall energy balance of zero or positive over a year;

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

3 of 19

•
•
•
•

consists of buildings having very high energy performance, complying with minimum
energy performance requirements and local building codes;
consists of buildings that are either nearly zero or have a very low amount of energy
demand;
covers the building demand through renewable energy sources to a large extent; and
has the possibility to produce renewable energy either onsite or nearby

In parallel to the above characteristics, the concept of ‘renewable energy communities’
has also emerged, as emphasized by the first and second points. For an energy community
to be a success, the interaction and collaboration of all stakeholders is the key to find the
best-fit solution for citizens. Nonetheless, municipalities must continuously to play their
role in the energy transition and managing the collaboration. This also implies that social
innovation, including behavioral change, has to be taken into consideration to deliver PEDs.
There may be many non-technical obstacles along the way, but community engagement is
vital to ensure the buy-in of community members [11].
1.3. What Is Happening Worldwide?
Cities are the melting pot for de-carbonization strategies relating to energy, transport,
buildings, industry, and agriculture [12]. Cities have access to large capital and abundant
know-how, and so they therefore have the ability to create economies of scale essential for
the piloting and scaling up of new ideas [13]. Nonetheless, cities are in need of citizens who
are not only political actors but also users, producers, consumers, and owners. A combined
effort from these actors may have a huge impact on local urban areas, associations, and
homes, thus propelling the climate transition, advancing the economy, and preserving
the environment. As evidently said by the Mission Board for Climate-Neutral and Smart
Cities, citizens and civil society have to be given more substantial roles, new platforms for
action, and better resources [13]. The Mission Board will support 100 European cities in
their dynamic transformation towards climate neutrality by 2030, eventually supporting
the European Green Deal and becoming climate-neutral by 2050. Citizens are in the center
of all action as the mission calls for citizens to be change agents and demands that cities
focus on citizens’ health and wellbeing, healthier lifestyles, and adopting a ‘by and for the
citizens’ way of thinking and working [13]. Cities are further pushed to put into practice
the ‘leave no one behind’ (just transition) component of the Green Deal [14].
Allen et al. [15] evaluated the relationship between e-participation as a type of coproduction and service performance by utilizing multiple large longitudinal datasets from
a smart city mobile platform. The study gave evidence that citizen e-participation in coproduction can increase the performance of service delivery, a link that is usually believed
to be true instead of tested. Feedback and monitoring through the platform led to more
issues being resolved, and service delivery had a larger influence on complex problems
such as damaged roads, which generally require multiple actors and may need more time
to be resolved. Simple issues such as waste management had less participation. However,
e-participation may still be limited in general. Few researchers have considered why some
citizens engage actively while others do not. A study by Choi and Song [16] in South
Korea claimed that people with a stronger social capital—commitment, ownership of
the community, and trust in government—have a greater likelihood to become part of
e-participation. Emphasis only on technology-driven factors such as usefulness, ease of
use, and perceived behavioral control become insignificant when tasks demand greater
civic engagement. Attention has to be paid to how to nurture individual social capital (e.g.,
virtue of good civic norms) through proper procedures, as well as institutional and political
reform [16].
Citizen engagement has remained a crucial component of smart cities in recent years.
As these projects last for lengths of four-to-five years, cities have ample time to experiment and implement new tools and approaches. Nonetheless, two elements have to be
considered for a smart city to be successful. First, citizens must be part of the design so
that the smart city answers to the real needs of the people. Second, each city has distinct

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

4 of 19

characteristics that have to be included to create a citizen participation strategy truly tailored and adapted to the local context [17]. Simonofski et al. described five context factors
that impact citizen participation strategies in two smart cities (Namur and Linköping):
the smart city consideration, the drivers for participation, the degree of centralization, the
legal requirements, and the citizens’ characteristics. The factors are applicable for any
city, however, because even though similar stakeholders and participations methods were
used in these two cases (direct interaction, living lab, open data, and online platform),
the methods were implemented for varying reasons that led to varying challenges being
encountered [17].
With the emerging number of smart cities around the world, there has been strong
focus on transactions between citizen and government. The presence of smartphone
and smart city technologies have further stimulated micro-transactions between citizen,
government, and information broker (for example, tax payment in exchange for services).
Johnson et al. [18] explored how the modern smart city includes the citizen as a series
of micro-transactions encoded on the real-time landscape of the city. This transactional
citizen is monitored by smart city sensors and is integrated into smart city decision-making
through certain platforms. The concept is based on four broad modes of transaction—
type (intentional contribution), tweet (intermediated by third party), tap (convened or
requested transaction), and pass (ambient transaction based on movement)—and enables
one to understand how citizens interact and find potential avenues for private sector
influence [18].
To provide a few examples of smart cities, the European funded IRIS project (Integrated and Replicable Solutions for Co-Creation in Sustainable Cities) created a planning
framework to steer activities around co-creation and citizen engagement. The project
created a citizen engagement ladder based on design and system thinking that includes
phase 1: awareness-raising; phase 2: mapping; phase 3: scoping; phase 4: co-creation and
design scenarios; phase 5: touchpoints and influencers; and phase 6: feedback loops [19].
Similarly, the CityxChange project developed the Citizen Participation Playbook to support
local communities in PEBs and PEDs [20]. This project developed a roadmap of four
distinctive citizen participatory processes as follows: process 1: the co-design of urban
interventions; process 2: collaborative legislation; process 3: participatory budgeting; and
process 4: citizens proposals. In addition, the project suggests best practices for effective
citizen participation considering other smart city projects, European Commission initiatives
and other organizations. These have been defined as (1) define the community; (2) clear
purpose and front loading; (3) continuous engagement: capacity building and feedback; (4)
open process, open source, and open data; (5) co-design, co-create, and co-produce; and
(6) privacy by design [20]. The MAtchUp project has focused on several aspects such as
participation, education and co-creation, and the local strategy of social services and local
energy offices to mitigate energy poverty at the district scale, as well as citizen feedback
channel for traffic management [21].
POCITYF (POsitive Energy CITY Transformation Framework), a similar European
funded project follows a “rapid prototyping” approach that enables simultaneous and
almost real-time feedback by citizens. The project focuses on incentives for co-creating,
co-delivering, and co-capturing value, and it also caters to disadvantaged communities
while promoting sustainable tourism [22].
The city of Tampere developed the Tampere. Finland, application as part of the
innovative partnership of the Enlighten Tampere Hackathon process by Geniem Oy. The
application uses open data and application programming interfaces (APIs) available in
the city, and collects user location data for input on the smart street lighting system in the
Viinikka pilot area. The application now has 45,000 users [23].
The mySMARTLife project focuses on the energy retrofitting of houses in Helsinki,
Nantes, and Hamburg. Evidence has shown that single-family house owners in Finland
are most concerned with energy savings [24], and it is usually very hard for housing
cooperatives to buy comprehensive energy retrofits despite potential profitability [25]. For

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

5 of 19

this reason, energy advisory workshops held in Helsinki offered information on the most
profitable energy retrofits, and both industry and city experts were invited to learn about
the concerns, provide peer support, and initiate common projects [26].
CIVITAS ELAN “Mobilising Citizens for Vital Cities”, launched by the European
Commission as part of CIVITAS (City VITAlity and Sustainability), introduced transport
measures and policies related to sustainable urban mobility and has the approach of
‘putting the citizen first.’ In Ljubljana, where citizen opinions were considered a burden
and excluded from decision-making, the project team established a cycling platform to
improve cycling conditions for residents and include the needs of disabled groups while
also ensuring citizen participation through the new spatial plan. The city of Gent already
had an active citizen population that was further enhanced by the use of dialogue cafes
and social media to engage all age groups. Porto went through a change, as citizens who
previously believed their suggestions would not be taken into consideration were pushed
to voice their ideas through user interviews, face-to-face surveys, flyers, and brochures.
In Brno, citizens were not used to discussions with transport operators, but after encouragement through public debates, public opinion research, and working groups, the traffic
situation and mobility was greatly improved. In Zagreb, the lack of public participation
was resolved through mobility dialogues, the training of citizens, the continuous provision
of information, and the establishment of the Zagreb forum for direct discussions with
experts [27].
1.4. Purpose of This Paper
The authors of this paper focused on the cities of Espoo (Finland) and Leipzig (Germany). They assessed the status quo of citizen engagement in the two cities and determined
whether the cities are prepared to implement PEDs. This was the first analysis of its kind
that focused on the cities of Espoo and Leipzig, as well as their citizens. It is envisioned
that the analysis will also support other European cities in evaluating and enhancing their
citizen engagement efforts and consequently support the energy transition towards PEDs.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 1 is the introduction to citizen engagement.
Section 2 presents the approach and method adopted for the paper. Section 3 presents
the selected case studies for each city, and Section 4 is the discussion and conclusion of
the paper.
2. Approach and Methodology
The cities of Espoo and Leipzig have very different starting points regarding citizen
engagement practices. As the next section shows, the existing infrastructure and regulations
greatly vary between cities, consequently affecting how local activities are performed. This
led the authors to perform an analysis of the two cities rather than a comparison of the two.
It should also be highlighted that while the authors aimed to collect as diverse a portfolio
as possible, part of the study material belongs to a European Horizon Europe (H2020)
project where Espoo and Leipzig are lighthouse cities. As stated earlier, the topic of citizen
engagement in the two cities has not been addressed in earlier studies, and this paper
is a stepping stone for understanding and enhancing citizen engagement in both Espoo
and Leipzig. A similar methodology was utilized for both cities to analyze and present
the status quo of citizen engagement. The aim of the analysis was (1) to find the best local
practice examples to build upon, (2) identify relevant (local) networks to cooperate with,
and (3) to recognize (local) success factors for engagement activities.
The first step was to choose diverse case studies per city that showcased citizen
engagement in urban development and transformation. The authors chose three case
studies per city (Table 1) with the following criteria to assure relevance and to give a
diverse view:
(1)
(2)
(3)

Identify case studies with relatable target groups.
Identify case studies with relatable objectives.
Identify case studies with relatable themes.

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

6 of 19

Table 1. Description of selected case studies.
Espoo
Case 1

Espoo
Case 2

Espoo
Case 3

Leipzig
Case 1

Leipzig
Case 2

Leipzig
Case 3

Actors in urban
politics,
business, and
science

All citizens

All citizens

Youngsters

Youngsters

Private
building
owners in the
districts

Objectives

Understand
mobility needs
and challenges

Understand
future mobility
from young
people’s
perspective

Safety of
youngsters
when visiting
shopping
centers

Convince
building
owners to
invest in energy
efficient
retrofitting

Develop a
future strategy
for the next
10–15 years

Development
and planning of
green and blue
infrastructure

Themes

Urban mobility
and sustainable
lifestyle

Urban mobility

New
construction
and renovation
projects

Reduce
emissions and
climate change

Sustainable
future

Healthy
environment
for better
wellbeing

Target groups

The selection of the case studies to represent the city of Espoo was based on discussions with the city representatives and those responsible for conducting citizen activities
within the H2020 project. In addition, the authors conducted a broad literature review to
understand the city processes and to know what initiatives and resources for the citizens
already exist. The city of Espoo already has a broad history of engaging residents in
both small and large-scale activities (Section 3), such as through schools and city libraries.
However, in order to assure relevance to the paper, the authors selected case studies that
had been conducted as part of the project as they were more recent and directly connected
to PEDs. The first and second case studies addressed a variety of citizen types and age
groups while focusing on mobility, while the third case study addressed a target group of
youngsters and focused on creating a safe environment. Overall, the selected case studies
present the recent efforts of Espoo and allow for the assessment of what could be the next
steps for the city.
The selection of the Leipzig case studies was based on an in-depth desktop research
and literature review, discussions within the local the project consortium, and interviews
with representatives of the city, including relevant project partners of the case studies. The
first case study focused on the behavioral change of tenants in apartment houses in the
field of energy-efficiency in daily life. The second case study related to target groups on a
district level and was connected to the development of PEDs. The third case study focused
on citizens and civil society actors, which will be of interest for more general engagement
activities and to raise awareness for the topic of PED to facilitate replication activities across
Europe.
The selected case studies presented a wide range of experience with participation formats over a period of several years and variety of citizens. The presentation of the case studies from Espoo and Leipzig in Section 3 is structured according to the following questions:
General questions:

•
•

What are the main responsibilities, structures and processes of implementation in
the cities?
What methods do Espoo and Leipzig use to include citizens?
Case specific questions:

•
•
•
•

What was the aim of each city case?
How was it done? What was the format?
Who was the audience? How many people were reached? What was the response?
What could be changed for replication and better results?

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

7 of 19

3. Case Study Analysis
3.1. Focus on Espoo
The Espoo Story is the city’s strategy of the future. It has been diligently prepared
with intensive cooperation together with residents, staff, and elected officials. The Espoo
Story directs the city’s operations toward common goals. The city council approved the
strategy in 2017 for the current council term of 2017–2021 [28]. Espoo is to have municipal
elections in April 2021, and preparations for the new strategy have been ongoing since
summer 2020. Values in the Espoo Story include the active involvement of residents in the
development of services and comprehensive co-operation with partners.
The four administrative development programs until the year 2021 are: (a) Participatory Espoo (Osallistuva Espoo), (b) Inspiring and dynamic Espoo, (c) Sustainable Espoo,
and (d) Healthy Espoo. The city is aiming for carbon-neutral status by the year 2050,
and, in parallel, Espoo will attempt to reduce resident-specific emissions by 60% by the
year 2030 compared to the levels of 1990 [29]. In Espoo, resident participation that has
extensively utilized new methods and tools has existed and been promoted for a long
time. In addition, the municipal democracy has also been continuously revised over the
years. The city believes that Espoo residents are much happier than the residents in other
parts of Finland [30]. In Finland, the basis for citizen involvement in city development
is set as laws. The Participatory Espoo program developed a participation model, with
cornerstones including a handbook. A new position of a development manager for citizen engagement has also been established and work started in August 2020. In order to
bring Espoo employees located in different parts of city organization together, there is a
participatory network to share ideas and information.
The Espoo Voluntary Local Review (VLR) is the framework to evaluate and communicate economic, ecological, social, and cultural sustainability, and it was developed with
regard to the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the UN’s 2030 Agenda. The
review was performed together with hundreds of people (Espoo employees, residents,
customers etc.). It was based on three themes: (1) leave no one behind, (2) let us do
it together, and (3) accelerated action [31]. Within the city structure, there are different
councils that cater to the need of different age groups such as the youth council (nuva),
which has been active for 20 years and comprises forty 13–18-year-old youths to contribute
in the decision making and planning. The Espoo youth council is the largest in Finland,
and it has representatives in the city council and committees with the right to attend and
speak. In 2020, it was also agreed that the youth council representatives have the right to
attend and speak at city board meetings. The Espoo Elderly Council serves as an advocate
for the elderly in the municipal decision making. In parallel, there is also a council for
the disabled. All councils together influence the planning and preparation of the city’s
activities, as well as monitoring issues relevant to well-being, health, inclusion, work-life,
living environment, housing, mobility, day-to-day activities, and services [31].
Service development in Espoo is based on experimental culture and co-creation. The
city as a service model has the following key aspects: the engagement of residents, the
accessibility of services by means such as digitalization, and the creation and deployment
of new business and operating models. In Espoo, this means that the city invites all
stakeholders of municipal services from companies to associations, research institutions,
and residents to refine old services and innovate new ones together. The joint “6Aika”
strategy of the six largest cities in Finland aims to develop more transparent and intelligent
services. It directs its focus on promoting transparent operating models that help the entire
urban community, research and development actors, and authorities [31].
An overview of the residents in Espoo showed that the number of foreign-speaking
residents in Espoo is gradually increasing. It is estimated that 18% of the Espoo residents speak a different language, and there are 150 different nationalities currently residing in Espoo [31]. Espoo citizens are able to give feedback to the municipal decision makers in a number of ways, either through an electronic feedback system [32]
(https://easiointi.espoo.fi/eFeedback/en (accessed on 15 November 2020)) or traditional

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

8 of 19

methods of communication. As per the Local Government Act, the resident of a municipality has the right to propose an initiative, e.g., the improvement of street or traffic. The
submission of a proposal is an official and regulated procedure that is handled more carefully than unofficial feedback messages. In addition, the city of Espoo arranges residents’
evenings, where it is possible to influence projects and plans. The residents of Espoo may
also influence matters that concern them through residents’ forums. Each residents’ forum
also has a preparation team [33].
The three successful citizen engagement projects of the city of Espoo are presented as
follows. These have been conducted as part of the ongoing European H2020 project as mentioned earlier and include several local partners (City of Espoo, VTT, KONE Corporation
(KONE), and Citycon).
Case 1—citizen user studies (2020): This case study was led by KONE, which is a
global leader in the elevator and escalator industry, as well as a solution provider for
the maintenance and modernization to add value to buildings throughout their life cycle. KONE’s current development efforts focus on urban flow and user experience in
smart cities. The case study aimed to gain insights into Espoo citizens’ mobility behaviors,
i.e., understand the ways and reasons for people to transition from one place to another,
as well as understanding the challenges and opportunities for designing behavioral interventions for more sustainable mobility behaviors. The user study focused on two diverse
districts of Espoo: Espoonlahti and Leppävaara. The Espoonlahti district is a developing
area where a new shopping center (Lippulaiva) is currently being built to replace the old
shopping center and the construction of an underground metro is to be completed by 2023.
The Leppävaara district is a fairly developed area, characterized by a shopping center
(Sello) and good public transportation train connections (both local and long-distance
train, bus, and tram to start operation in 2024). Thus, the mobility infrastructure and the
opportunities for (behavioral) interventions between these two places greatly vary.
With a focus on these two districts, citizens’ mobility behaviors were studied through
mobile probing, interviews, and co-creation workshops. The citizen insights were supported with mobility and citizen engagement expert interviews in order to tie the findings
from the user studies into a more systemic understanding. Citizen needs were put into the
core of innovation, while relevant stakeholders such as city representatives and service
providers in mobility were involved in the research and development process from the
early stages of the project. The ultimate goal of the applied citizen engagement process was
to develop and test behavioral interventions and smart ecosystems that support citizens’
sustainable mobility behaviors and habit formation, as well as more sustainable lifestyles
in Espoo by the end of 2022.
The citizens were selected through an application process advertised on local social
media channels (Facebook). The application was open to all citizens in Espoo, and 41 respondents answered a preliminary survey. The citizens were asked to provide background
information about their mobility modes (such as walking, biking, private car, public transportation, and micro mobility solutions), attitudes towards sustainability, and life situation.
The final sample consisted of 10 diverse Espoo citizens, representing varying demographics
(Table 2). Five of the participants were selected from the Espoonlahti district, and the other
five were selected from the Leppävaara district to achieve a full understanding of mobility
needs of Espoo citizens. The participants documented their daily mobility behaviors,
as well as related experiences and thoughts through a mobile probing method in which
images, text, videos, and voice messages were sent on WhatsApp for a period of eight
weeks (Figure 1). The mobile probing method captured and communicated people’s daily
mobility behaviors on a holistic level, enabling a deeper understanding of citizens’ mobility
needs. The method enabled an active role for the citizens in the research and design process
of future mobility [34]. KONE provided the participants phone devices to document their
daily journeys. The mobile probing activity was supported with weekly questions and
tasks sent on WhatsApp to prompt reflection on the participants’ current mobility decisions
and alternative mobility modes. After the eight weeks, participants were interviewed to

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

9 of 19

gain a deeper understanding based on the documented contents. In the final workshop,
the participants co-ideated mobility concepts related to, for example, autonomous cars
and material logistics based on the identified challenges and opportunities deriving from
the user research. Due to COVID-19, all research activities during the study were held
online and facilitated through digital platforms. Some challenges, such as limited digital
capabilities and skills, were faced in the final workshop, as the participants did not have a
prior experience of using digital co-creation platforms.
Table 2. Demographic information about the final research participants.
Gender

Age

Life Situation

Male

58

Spouse and two children (one living on their own)

Female

29

Spouse and a newborn baby

Male

41

Spouse and two small children

Female

20

Parents and sister

Male

44

Spouse and three children with active hobbies

Female

67

Spouse (using wheelchair)

Male

39

Single with three children (kindergarten/school)

Female

27

Living alone

Male

37

Living alone

Female

54

Teenage child every second week

Figure 1. Two screenshots from the WhatsApp probing contents sent by the participants—driving
daughter and her bike to the ice rink (left) and travelling with a wheelchair (right).

At the end of the final workshop, participants were asked for feedback on the quality of
citizen engagement achieved through the user study. Through the described comprehensive
citizen engagement process that lasted for four months in total, a holistic understanding
of various Espoo citizens’ mobility challenges, needs, and desires was gained. It must be
highlighted that informed consent was signed by the participants to maintain their privacy
and data protection during the study period.
Case 2—testing a participatory design research workshop concept with youth (2020):
This study was also led by KONE and arranged as part of a high school entrepreneurship
course. A group of nine students (aged 17 years) were invited to a participatory design
research workshop with the aim to investigate desirable future (sustainable) urban mobility
from young people’s perspective. Participatory design research workshops (1.5–2 h) were
conducted on five themes: pedestrian, bicycling, public transportation, shared mobility,
and mobility inside hybrid buildings. The workshop was formed around a case of an
imaginary new living area currently developed in Espoo.

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

10 of 19

The workshop was facilitated face-to-face. In the workshop, the youngsters were
asked two questions: “What kind of challenges do you experience related to the abovementioned themes?” and “What would be your dream user experience (based on the five
themes)? The ideas were organized through post-its, e.g., blue post-it-notes illustrated the
challenges and yellow post-it-notes showed the desires (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Youth discussing the workshop results related to their future mobility needs and wishes.

The preliminary findings of the workshop indicated that the youth experience many
challenges related to their current mobility. These challenges were related to matters such
as weather and dressing, road safety, bike storing, noise pollution, and crowding. In
addition, many desires for an improved city infrastructure that supports walking, biking,
and public transport were communicated in the workshop. According the participants,
this could be achieved by creating a mobility infrastructure with reduced noise pollution
and shorter distances to places. All the students received a sticker for voting on the change
that they would prefer in the close future of urban mobility developments. The workshop
also helped build empathy for this sometimes-marginalized target group and allowed the
experts to understand the criteria for future urban development efforts. The next step
would be to plan and organize collaborative workshops for ideating more tangible ideas
for tackling the identified challenges and high-level desires.
Case 3—co-creating shopping centers together with youngsters (2012 and ongoing):
Shopping centers can be characterized as quasi-public spaces that may be defined as being
open to all but are under private ownership [35]. Citycon is a leading owner and developer
of mixed-use centers for urban living located in the Nordic region [36]. In Finland, Citycon
owns and manages 12 centers, and the largest one called Iso Omena is located in Espoo. It
attracts approximately 19.9 million visitors yearly and is a great example of urban mixeduse center with retail, public services (such as library, health care, and social insurance
institution office), office spaces, and housing. This makes Citycon shopping centers even
closer to public spaces where citizens handle multiple activities.
The aim of the workshop was to ensure that young citizens feel safe and comfortable
while visiting shopping centers and that they are aware of the common rules to behave
in shopping centers. The three main citizen engagement highlights for young citizens
implemented the shopping centers are: (1) co-creation workshops, (2) making common
shopping center rules together, and (3) working with shopping centers’ guards (known as
NOJA-guards) devoted and educated to work with youngsters (Table 3). In Finnish, the
NOJA Guards is derived from nuorten oma järjestyksenvalvoja® and translates to youth’s
own security guard. All these activities were developed and held together with Nuorten
Palvelu ry [37] an organization that works with and for the youth and whose support was
crucial in order to reach as many young people as possible.

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

11 of 19

Table 3. Targets and timelines of different youth citizen engagement actions developed and held in
Citycon together with Nuorten Palvelu ry.
Co-Creation Workshops

Making Common Rules

NOJA-Guards

Target

To involve youngsters
and to idea together

To make common rules of
behavior in shopping
center

To have known and
safe adults to help
youngsters in
shopping centers and
to decrease the
amount of disorder

Timeline

During renovation or
construction project

Before opening or when
needed

While operation

The co-creation workshops are organized for youngsters when larger renovation or
construction projects are ongoing. For example, the Iso Omena shopping center in Espoo
was expanded in 2013–2017, so several co-creation workshops were held during that time.
Approximately 20–30 youngsters (aged 12–16 years) participated in the workshop and
worked together with architects, youth workers from Nuorten Palvelu ry, representatives
from Espoo library, and security guards. The youngsters were invited to directly participate
in the workshops by the NOJA guards who were present in the shopping center. In addition,
Nuorten Palvelu also invited youngsters through their own networks. These methods
ensured diversity amongst the group.
The workshops were conducted in an interactive manner where the construction
project was first described to the youth, and later the youngsters were divided into groups
to work on different topics. A few of the most popular ideas from the workshop were
developed further (Figure 3). At the end of the workshops, the youngsters were rewarded
with movie tickets for their valuable contribution.

Figure 3. Ideas from youngsters that were realized in Iso Omena—large aquariums (left) and a large clock in Iso Omena
(right). These ideas came from youngsters, and they were planned together with Citycon employees.

By making rules for the shopping center together with youngsters, the designers and
building owners had the opportunity to understand and solve problems that may have
been overlooked. The youngsters invented possible rules applicable to all the visitors in
the shopping centers. It was assumed that rules that are made together are usually obeyed
better compared to rules given from above (managers). NOJA-guards (security guards) are
still active, and they are educated and devoted to work with young customers. Observation
showed that shopping centers with NOJA-guards have decreased the amount of disorder.
Their presence is also a great way for shopping center owners to pay attention to young
customers, implement social responsibility, and increase the amount of positive publicity.

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

12 of 19

3.2. Focus on Leipzig
Leipzig is the initiator and namesake of the Leipzig Charter on Sustainable European
Cities [38], which was signed by 27 EU member states in 2007. The Leipzig Charter was
the basis for a new urban policy in Europe, in particular for the concept of integrated
urban development, which emphasizes the involvement of residents and an improved
dialogue between representatives from politics, residents, and economic actors. The current
framework for urban development in Leipzig is formed by the strategic goals of municipal
policy, manifested in the integrated urban development concept “INSEK Leipzig 2030” of
2018 [39]. The main four target areas for Leipzig are: quality of life, social stability, national
and international importance, and competition between cities and regions. These target
areas are concretized by defining specific focus areas and technical concepts. One of the
main goals of Leipzig is to be climate-neutral by 2050, and the city administration itself
plans to be climate-neutral by 2030 [40]. Citizen and stakeholder engagement is explicitly
listed as one of the principles of the INSEK implementation strategy.
In Germany, the law requires various forms of citizen engagement such as citizen
petitions, citizen meetings, participation in city district and local councils, and formal
public engagement in urban land use planning. However, many municipalities have
established local guidelines that go beyond these legal requirements in order to include
the perspectives of their citizens, to identify barriers early, and to improve the acceptance
of their actions. In 2009, Leipzig started to develop a framework for an informal citizen
participation resolution involving various actors from politics, science, administration,
and citizenship. In 2012, the guidelines for citizen engagement [41] were manifested as
the mayor’s instruction to the city administration. They included the involvement of the
citizens, city council, and administration in municipal processes in all areas of responsibility
(trialogue principle), and they defined citizen engagement as an integrative part of these
processes. Key points related to transparency and cooperation in decision-making. The
basic principle is the “early and continuous involvement of citizens in planning and
decision-making processes.” In addition to the strategic goals, the guidelines contained
recommendations for implementation, as well as a set of instruments.
Depending on the character of the projects, various offices are responsible for planning
and implementing urban participation processes. Since 2014, they have been supported
by the “Leipzig Weiterdenken” coordination center (“Thinking Leipzig Ahead”) [42]. Its
area of responsibility can be divided into three fields: Coaching and consulting within the
city administration, testing innovative processes, and finally evaluating the implemented
projects. In 2015, the strengths and weaknesses of the participation culture in Leipzig were
analyzed. As a result, the coordinating office has since then maintained a central communication platform that provides transparent reports on completed, ongoing, and planned
participation projects. The central participation structure also includes the city office [43],
as a platform for citizen participation and commitment, and the youth parliament [44].
Successful formats of decentralized participation management include regular district
forums, Leipzig neighborhood management, and district offices. District forums are
organized by the city in the context of ongoing participation projects to inform the residents
of a district about urban projects and to stimulate discussion. By making a representative
selection of participants and embedding smaller discussion groups, the citizens’ opinions
can be analyzed in a representative way. In some key areas of urban development (the
districts of Grünau, Leipzig East, Leipzig West, Paunsdorf, and Schönefeld), neighborhood
or community management acts on behalf of the office of residential construction and
urban renewal (AWS), implemented by private agencies. Neighborhood management is
always connected to national or European urban development funding programs (e.g.,
Soziale Stadt, Stadtumbau Ost, and URBAN (European initiatives)). Its task is to initiate
communication between administration, politics, and local stakeholders, as well as to
support local associations, initiatives, and projects, thus strengthening identification and
the culture of participation in a neighborhood. The specific design of a management
structure is based on the needs of the respective area. Neighborhood councils have been

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

13 of 19

formed in two of the priority areas (the districts of Grünau and Leipzig West) as points
of contact within the neighborhood, as well as for city administration and politics. These
councils consist of citizens or representatives of citizen committees and representatives
from other thematic areas (child and youth work, culture, education, housing companies,
local economy, church, social affairs, etc.). In the context of neighborhood management,
the city operates district offices in some districts as points of contact for residents.
In addition to the experience gained from local projects, Leipzig also has experience
with European smart city projects. From 2015 to 2020, Leipzig was one of the follower
cities in the project Triangulum [45], focusing on cutting-edge concepts for smart district
development. Within this project, the city developed an implementation strategy for
smart city solutions in the sectors of energy, mobility, information, and communications
technology for the Leipzig West area. Moreover, the findings of the Triangulum project
have been considered in the development of the 2030 Leipzig INSEK Integrated Urban
Development Concept.
The three successful citizen engagement projects of the city of Leipzig are presented
as follows.
Case 1—Energy-efficient Retrofitting Management (ESM) (2015–2018): The ESM [46]
established in two districts (Alt-Schönefeld, Lindenau-Plagwitz) in 2015 was part of the
Leipzig Energy and Climate Protection Program 2014–2020, developed for European
Energy Award certification. The objective was to convince building owners to invest in
energy-efficient retrofitting, thereby improving the energy balance of the district. For
this purpose, the seecon Ingenieure GmbH (Leipzig, Germany) and the Deutsche Stadtund Grundstücksentwicklungsgesellschaft mbH & Co. KG, Regionalbüro Leipzig (DSK,
Leipzig, Germany) established a desktop support system for measures to reduce emissions
and to adapt to climate change, especially regarding integrated neighborhood concepts,
as well as to improve the energy efficiency of buildings and infrastructures. The main
target group comprised private building owners in the districts. The different formats have
reached between several dozen (consulting) and several thousand people (campaign) and
are as follows [46,47]:

•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•

Postal and telephone contact with residential building owners (2015–2016).
Energy and retrofitting consulting for private owners and tenants (2015–2017).
Public event on the occasion of the cooperation with the Consumer Advice Center
combined with exhibition (2016).
Energy and retrofitting consulting in cooperation with the Consumer Advice Center
Saxony (2016–2018).
Joint campaign “Leipzig is Climate Conscious” with the Department for Environmental Protection (AfU) and the Department for Urban Development and Construction
(ASW)—inserts in the district journals combined with vouchers for free energy consulting (2017).
Thermography tour: guided thematic walk (2017).
MobilityChange stakeholder workshop in the neighborhood: common elaboration of
practical project ideas and suggestions (2015).
Talks on cooperation for environmental education projects with local education actors
and schools in the neighborhood, as well as the presentation of coordinated project
outlines (2015).

During the three years of this project, it became clear that the function of a municipal
advisor for energy issues with the option to advise key stakeholders and interested private
owners is an important task for future district management. In the case of private owners,
a high proportion of owner-occupiers is advantageous, as investment-oriented property
owners of apartment houses have little interest in energy-efficient, socially-responsible
renovation measures due to the lack of incentives on the rental market in Leipzig. Cooperation with the municipal or cooperative owners of apartment houses is also promising. In
these cases, the tenants are to be involved in order to gain their acceptance and support.
In addition, community or commercial facilities showed clear interest in the energy opti-

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

14 of 19

mization of the building fabric and management. Here, the commercial tenants should be
involved as well.
One of the most important conclusions to be drawn from this ESM project is that the
cooperation with key stakeholders in the district, who take over the function of multipliers,
is essential for the successful involvement of local residents. If no stakeholder networks
exist, a network and trust building phase has to be scheduled.
Case 2—2030 Leipzig INSEK Integrated Urban Development Concept (2015–2017):
One of the biggest and most successful participation projects in Leipzig was the participative development of the 2030 Leipzig INSEK Integrated Urban Development Concept [48,49]. Based upon the previous integrated urban development concept, SEKo 2020,
the city planning office initiated a participative process to mutually design the approach for
realizing the strategic vision for Leipzig 2030. This participative process was managed by
the “Thinking Leipzig Ahead” coordination center and an external agency. The objective of
the project was to develop a future strategy for the next 10–15 years to ensure economic
power, finances, understanding of democracy, and natural resources. The different formats
have reached between several dozen (workshops, forums) and several hundred people
(presentations) [50,51]:

•
•

•
•
•
•
•

Public kick-off event (2015).
Four thematic workshops: moderated discussions in small and big groups, partly
combined with presentations, exhibitions, and speed dating with city administration
staff (2016–2017).
Four district forums: moderated discussions in small groups combined with presentations (2016).
Three working groups: discussion at the LivingLab Leipzig West (2016).
Public presentation and discussion of the draft (2017).
Presentation of the draft in five district forums: Grünau, Leipzig North, Schönfeld/Mockau, Leipzig East, and Paunsdorf (2017).
Exhibition on the concept supported by Leipzig Lego model makers (2017).

The main topics of the participative discussions were defined as follows: challenges
for living together in a growing city, future growth of the medium-sized economy, further
spatial development, digital city, sustainable mobility, and active urban society. The
contents of the discussion were based on sectoral plans, such as urban development
plans and specific field-related plans. City administration, several city departments, and
various interdepartmental working groups were involved in the planning and development
process. The target groups of the participation formats were either the urban society per se
or specific actors in urban politics, urban society, business, and science. The findings and
results of the workshop and forum discussions, and thus the opinions and wishes of the
citizens of Leipzig, were integrated into the concept.
The city of Leipzig gained a lot of experience in involving different stakeholders
using various participation formats dependent on the specific objectives, the size of the
participant group, and the level of involvement. One of the key aspects throughout the
process was transparency—all steps and results were documented and published on the
city’s website.
Case 3—Green Masterplan: Leipzig green–blue 2030 (2018–2020): The Green Masterplan [52] is a development concept for the green–blue infrastructure of Leipzig (green
space and waters). It is meant to become the politically accepted, socially accepted, and
application-oriented basis for upcoming decisions on the spatial development of the city.
Results from the Open Space Strategy 2017 are part of the 2030 Leipzig INSEK Integrated
Urban Development Concept. The Green Masterplan shall define specific implementation
concepts for green space and water design. The participation process is managed by the
Office of Green Space and Waters (ASG).
The objective of the project was to involve citizens in the development and planning
process of the green and blue infrastructure for the purpose of healthy environmental
conditions, individually usable recreation and exercise opportunities in open spaces that

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

15 of 19

are accessible to all, and promoting health, as well as a biotope network for species and
habitats. The different formats have reached between several dozen (for consulting and
workshops/green walks) and several thousand people (for campaign and survey) [53]:

•
•
•
•
•

Online survey on attitudes and expectations (2019).
Two citizen forums: discussion in groups with different questions combined with
presentations and exhibition of online survey results (2019–2020).
Four thematic workshops: discussion at round table combined with presentations
(2019–2020).
Green labs: various activities that turn urban green spaces and water bodies into a
cultural experience and field of experimentation.
Green walks: regular moderated walks on different topics combined with the presentation of the Green Masterplan; participants wear green vests and there is a record of
observations/suggestions on cards/posters (2019–2020).

The main topics of the participative discussions were: environmental protection,
health, climate adaptation, biodiversity, environmentally-friendly mobility, and urban
gardening. The main target group of the participation process was the urban society—
citizens and civil society actors. Points of critiques and proposals arising from these forums
and workshops are to be included in the Green Masterplan. In addition to conventional
formats, the city uses creative formats such as green labs and green walks to strengthen the
citizens’ relationship to their city and to raise awareness for their environment.
4. Discussion and Conclusions
The united nations intergovernmental panel on climate change’s claims that there are
11 years left to save the planet before an irreversible climate catastrophe occurs. The climate
urgency is to be resolved not only on the macro level but also at the local level where
municipalities are required to engage in the transformation of the use and production of
energy for the wellbeing of citizens [54]. While PEDs are low-carbon solutions for cities,
they must provide co-benefits to citizens and local authorities (such as better wellbeing and
health, job creation, increased gross domestic product (GDP), and tourism) [11]. In addition,
success with a PED requires that all stakeholders join forces to develop the best-fit solution
for and by the citizens to tackle the global climate crisis. Furthermore, the new Green Deal
released by the European Commission demands new and more effective ways of including
city leaders, authorities, and citizens to establish political dialogue across various levels
of government [55]. In parallel, the concept of ‘renewable energy communities’ is also
being discussed and holds great importance when planning the implementation of PEDs.
Looking at the definition of PEDs provided in the report by the European Commission,
there is a clear and strong emphasis on ownership by citizens and change being led by
citizens [11].
This paper performed an analysis of the status quo of citizen engagement in the two
emerging cities of Espoo and Leipzig, where the local authorities, together with the local
partners, have planned several actions to initiate the uptake of PEDs for a carbon-neutral
sustainable future. It has to be recognized that these cities have had very different starting
points and varying experiences, so it is not feasible to make a comparison; rather, it was
feasible to study the current situation and provide support in progressing towards the
successful implementation of PEDs.
Through this paper, it can be seen that there is no one definition for citizen engagement
in cities. Citizens play an active role in defining issues, finding solutions, and identifying
priorities for action. However, involving citizens is voluntary for cities, and such an
inclusion process varies between cities and may be even lacking completely in certain cities.
When discussing how the city of Espoo plans to create a smooth transition to PEDs
together with citizens, the authors looked at some of the planned actions, such as engaging
different age groups. In parallel, the city is determined to encourage a sustainable lifestyle
with a special emphasis on urban mobility behaviors and citizens’ daily journeys by
following a design thinking process and utilizing methods from co-design. The described

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

16 of 19

case studies provide evidence that the city and its expert partners can effectively engage
a variety of actors, and the participation formats may be readily adapted to suit current
requirements. With the existing participation infrastructure within the city, spanning over
decades, building up and replicating the described citizen engagement activities will be
easy to do. As citizen engagement is also part of Finnish law, over the years, there has
been a strong emphasis on co-creation and encouragement of participation through the
local council meetings, forums and through local networks across Finland. In addition,
Espoo frequently conducts city-wide online surveys on different topics, such as ‘Mun
Espoo’ (My Espoo) where residents indicate their satisfaction with the city services and
provide suggestions.
The Espoo case studies illustrated how Espoo has worked with different age groups
on various topics. The recruitment of citizens could be a challenge, but it may be resolved
through rigorous promotion and reaching out to residents through various channels, such
as social media, and providing motivation for participation. The youth are considered a
marginalized group of society, but the experts have reached the youth through various
methods to gather as diverse a group as possible and to ensure that all opinions are heard.
Based on the success of the youth workshops, the city of Espoo has now begun work
with two junior high schools and its students to plan a new shopping center in Espoo.
Considering the global pandemic, this activity has been adapted to an online format, and
co-creation with the students continues. It must also be highlighted that because the
purpose of the Espoo workshops was to hold discussions on a general level and to hear
citizen concerns regarding city development, the actual development of ideas that might
include intellectual property was not realized and there were no issues related to ownership
of ideas.
For the city of Leipzig, the former participation projects were found to be a good
basis for further developing its participatory approach in urban development and energy
transformation. The objective is to involve and to enable residents and local stakeholders
in the planning and implementation processes of positive energy districts in urban society.
This includes both convincing stakeholders who are directly involved and raising general
awareness for the topic itself. Networking and cooperation with existing structures that
already form a central point of contact in a district have proven to be advantageous. They
can provide a first assessment of relevant stakeholders and their needs, and they can
arrange for relevant contacts. Established structures and local key actors are perceived as
trustworthy and can successfully promote project activities as multipliers. Similarly, the
establishment of a permanent contact point for stakeholders has also proven useful. One of
the promising formats with transfer potential for energy topics is ESM energy consulting
in cooperation with the consumer center in Saxony, which could conceivably accompany
the introduction of certain products or activities. The consumer centers in Germany are
non-governmental organizations representing consumers’ interests. They enjoy great trust
among the population as advisory bodies for energy issues, among other things, and can
be valuable partners in energy-related projects. As a third point, the participation format
differs for each target group. One of the lessons learned from the ESM project is that
there are no adequate incentives for investment-oriented property owners of apartment
houses in Leipzig to improve the energy performance of their buildings. On the other hand,
local tenants have little influence on the owners’ decisions because they have no levers
under the current circumstances. The better target group for energy-retrofitting are the
owner-occupiers who directly profit from this kind of investment in the end (socially and
economically). Tenants, in turn, are limited in their action and are the right target group
for promoting energy-saving activities in everyday life. In the end, the city has to define
different starting points and goals for different target groups with different frameworks
of action.
This paper aimed to answer the question whether the two cities are ready to implement
PEDs; considering the background of each city and the diverse experiences that each
one has in engaging actors, it may be said that both Espoo and Leipzig are prepared to

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

17 of 19

effectively move towards the implementation of PEDs in a citizen-inclusive manner. A
variety of citizens have been invited to participate and provide input on services and
development projects in both cities. The inclusion of the young generation, children,
teenagers, and vulnerable young people is crucial in urban development because it leads to
awareness on energy transition from an early stage, builds up or strengthens the emotional
bond with their own neighborhood, and creates ownership. Moreover, as early adopters,
children and young people can exert a motivating influence on their local environment,
including their family. For this reason, it is important to include special engagement
formats for this target group, as observed in the Espoo case studies. The cooperation
with local schools, education centers, and training centers in the district, as well as with
associations and sponsors of children’s and youth work on site, should be part of projects
dealing with urban development. Citizens must also feel that their opinions and feedback
are heard and considered by the experts. Therefore, it becomes essential that interaction
with citizens is not carried out for the sake of interaction. Instead, experts have to be
ready to modify and adapt the plans based on citizen needs. In parallel, it must also be
highlighted that common formats such as presentations, discussions, workshops, and
working groups, sometimes combined with informational formats such as exhibitions,
are indispensable parts of the participation strategy according to the project phase, the
defined target group, and the purpose of the activity. Depending on the circumstances,
the influence of participants ranges from information to the development of proposed
solutions and co-creative formats. Additionally, it is advisable to include more event-like
and creative formats to raise awareness, create emotional impact and get into discussion
with local residents. The 2017 exhibition on INSEK Leipzig 2030 was supported, e.g., by
Leipzig Lego model makers. The Green Masterplan, and the ESM project provided guided
thematic walks or tours illustrating real-life implications of political topics.
With the global pandemic, the key question is the adaptation of participation plans.
The crucial points are not only the different levels of digital literacy, access to digital
infrastructure, and of willingness to use digital technologies but also the mode of interaction
itself that differs of course from that of face-to-face events. Recent developments have
forced us to rethink our concepts and to include much more digital activities than intended.
Certain activities, however, have the capability to be immediately adapted the online space,
e.g., the user mobility study was conducted entirely remotely through phone devices.
Workshops held by the city, such as inviting residents to develop new participation ways,
have already been switched online. In the coming months, the cities of Espoo and Leipzig
will investigate inclusive digital and hybrid participation formats, and they will adapt them
further to create innovative use cases for the development of PEDs for replication across
Europe. Moreover, the cities will look into possible key performance indicators (KPIs) that
could be deployed to measure success with citizens through different participation formants
and to assess how these could be adapted to suit the different contexts across Europe.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Z.F.; methodology, Z.F. and U.P.; writing—original draft
preparation, Z.F., U.P., S.-S.S., K.K. and M.T.; writing—review and editing, Z.F., U.P., S.-S.S., K.K. and
M.T. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Sustainable energy Positive & zero cARbon CommunitieS
(SPARCS). Grant agreement ID: 864242 and the APC was waived.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the
study. This is only applicable to Espoo case studies and not applicable to the Leipzig cases.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to Elina Wanne, Reetta Turtiainen and Merja Ryöppy
for their valuable contribution regarding the Espoo case studies.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

18 of 19

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.

Carpini, M.X.D.; Cook, F.L.; Jacobs, L.R. Public deliberation, discursive participation, and citizen engagement: A Review of the
Empirical Literature. Annu. Rev. Politi. Sci. 2004, 7, 315–344. [CrossRef]
Warren, A.M.; Sulaiman, A.; Jaafar, N.I. Social media effects on fostering online civic engagement and building citizen trust and
trust in institutions. Gov. Inf. Q. 2014, 31, 291–301. [CrossRef]
Gil De Zúñiga, H.; Jung, N.; Valenzuela, S. Social Media Use for News and Individuals’ Social Capital, Civic Engagement and
Political Participation. J. Comput. Commun. 2012, 17, 319–336. [CrossRef]
Zukin, C.; Keeter, S.; Andolina, M.; Jenkins, K.; Carpini, M.X.D. A New Engagement?: Political Participation, Civic Life, and the
Changing American Citizen; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK; New York, NY, USA, 2006; pp. 1–270. [CrossRef]
Ekman, J.; Amnå, E. Political participation and civic engagement: Towards a new typology. Hum. Aff. 2012, 22, 283–300.
[CrossRef]
Bonsón, E.; Perea, D.; Bednárová, M. Twitter as a tool for citizen engagement: An empirical study of the Andalusian municipalities.
Gov. Inf. Q. 2019, 36, 480–489. [CrossRef]
Smart Cities Information System. In Citizen Engagement Solution Booklet; European Union: Brussels, Belgium, 2019.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), CIHR’S Citizen Engagement Handbook. 2012. Available online: http://www.
cihr-irsc.gc.ca/e/42196.html (accessed on 1 July 2020).
The Association of Netherlands Municipalities VNG. Participatie. Available online: https://vng.nl/artikelen/participatie
(accessed on 1 July 2020).
European Innovation Partnership on Smart Cities and Communities. Citizen Focus Action Cluster. Available online: https:
//eu-smartcities.eu/clusters/3/description (accessed on 1 July 2020).
Schütz, F.; Heidingsfelder, M.L.; Schraudner, M. Co-shaping the Future in Quadruple Helix Innovation Systems: Uncovering
Public Preferences toward Participatory Research and Innovation. She Ji J. Des. Econ. Innov. 2019, 5, 128–146. [CrossRef]
Paci, S.; Bertoldi, D.; Shnapp, S. Enabling Positive Energy Districts across Europe: Energy efficiency couples renewable energy.
JRC Tech. Rep. 2020. [CrossRef]
European Commission. Final Report of the High-Level Panel of the European Decarbonisation Pathways Initiative; European Commission:
Brussels, Belgium, 2018. [CrossRef]
European Commission. Cities by 2030—By and for the Citizens. Interim Report of the Mission Board for Climate-Neutral and Smart
Cities; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2020. [CrossRef]
European Commission. The European Green Deal. 2019. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2
024/european-green-deal_en (accessed on 1 July 2020).
Allen, B.; Tamindael, L.E.; Bickerton, S.H.; Wonhyuk, C. Does citizen coproduction lead to better urban services in smart cities
projects? An empirical study on e-participation in a mobile big data platform. Gov. Inf. Q. 2020, 37, 101412. [CrossRef]
Choi, J.-C.; Song, C. Factors explaining why some citizens engage in E-participation, while others do not. Gov. Inf. Q. 2020,
37, 101524. [CrossRef]
Simonofski, A.; Vallé, T.; Serral, E.; Wautelet, Y. Investigating context factors in citizen participation strategies: A comparative
analysis of Swedish and Belgian smart cities. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2021, 56, 102011. [CrossRef]
Johnson, P.A.; Robinson, P.J.; Philpot, S. Type, tweet, tap, and pass: How smart city technology is creating a transactional citizen.
Gov. Inf. Q. 2020, 37, 101414. [CrossRef]
Integrated and Replicable Solutions for Co-Creation in Sustainable Cities. In H2020 Project, Deliverable 1.6; European Commission:
Brussels, Belgium, 2018.
García, J.B.; Sánchez Mora, M.; Webb, R.; Næss, K.S.; Perkins, A.; Fica, C.; Prokýšek, M.; Delgado Ortiz, L.C.; Petkova, E.;
Hallimäe, T. +CityxChange D3.2: Delivery of the Citizen Participation Playbook; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2020.
MAtchUp. MAtchUp EU Project—Citizens Solution. 2018. Available online: https://www.matchup-project.eu/solutions/
citizens-engagement/ (accessed on 1 July 2020).
POCITYF. H2020 POCITYF. Available online: https://pocityf.eu/solutions/#citizen-driven-co-creation (accessed on 1 July 2020).
City of Tampere. Stardust. Available online: https://www.tampere.fi/smart-tampere/kestava-tampere-2030-ohjelma/stardust.
html (accessed on 1 July 2020).
Hirvonen, J.; Vanhatalo, M. Ympäristöasenteet ja kaupunkikehitys Helsingissä ja Vantaalla; TUTKIMUKSIA: Helsinki, Finland, 2018.
Murto, P.; Jalas, M.; Juntunen, J.; Hyysalo, S. The difficult process of adopting a comprehensive energy retrofit in housing
companies: Barriers posed by nascent markets and complicated calculability. Energy Policy 2019, 132, 955–964. [CrossRef]
Viitanen, M. Mission Board Seminar. Energy Renaissance. MySmartLife Project; European Union: Brussels, Belgium, 2020.
Marega, M.; van Aken, E.; Braun, M.; Kontić, V.; Delanghe, P.; Pavić-Rogošić, L.; Štěpnička, J.; Martinho, B.S.; Engels, D. Civitas
Elan Measure Leaders, Citizen Engagement in the Field Of Mobility Work and Lessons Learned; European Commission: Brussels,
Belgium, 2012.
City of Espoo. Espoo Story. 2017. Available online: https://www.espoo.fi/en-us/city_of_espoo/Decisionmaking/The_Espoo_
Story (accessed on 1 July 2020).
City of Espoo. Goal: A Sustainable Future. 2020. Available online: https://www.espoo.fi/en-US/Housing_and_environment/
Sustainable_development (accessed on 1 July 2020).

Buildings 2021, 11, 102

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.

50.

51.

52.
53.

54.
55.

19 of 19

City of Espoo. Osallistuva Espoo. 2020. Available online: https://www.espoo.fi/fi-fi/espoon_kaupunki/paatoksenteko/
espootarina/osallistuva_espoo (accessed on 1 July 2020).
City of Espoo. City of Espoo—Feedback system. 2020. Available online: https://easiointi.espoo.fi/eFeedback/en (accessed on 15
November 2020).
City of Espoo. Voluntary Local Review—Implementation of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals 2030 in the City.
Available online: https://www.local2030.org/pdf/vlr/EspooVLR2020Web.pdf (accessed on 1 July 2020).
City of Espoo. Influence. Available online: https://www.espoo.fi/en-US/City_of_Espoo/Influence (accessed on 1 July 2020).
Koch, D.; Maaß, S. Digital Probes Kit. i-com 2018, 17, 169–178. [CrossRef]
Sahito, N.; Han, H.; Nguyen, T.V.T.; Kim, I.; Hwang, J.; Jameel, A. Examining the Quasi-Public Spaces in Commercial Complexes.
Sustainability 2020, 12, 1830. [CrossRef]
Citycon. Available online: https://www.citycon.com/ (accessed on 1 November 2020).
European Commission. Leipzig Charter on Sustainable European Cities. 2007. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/regional_
policy/archive/themes/urban/leipzig_charter.pdf (accessed on 30 November 2020).
City of Leipzig. Integrated Urban Development Concept “INSEK Leipzig 2030”. 2018. Available online: https://static.leipzig.de/
fileadmin/mediendatenbank/leipzig-de/Stadt/02.6_Dez6_Stadtentwicklung_Bau/61_Stadtplanungsamt/Stadtentwicklung/
Stadtentwicklungskonzept/Leipzig-2030_Beschluss_Gesamtfassung.pdf (accessed on 30 November 2020). (in German).
City of Leipzig. Emergency Climate Action Program 2020. Available online: https://static.leipzig.de/fileadmin/
mediendatenbank/leipzig-de/Stadt/02.3_Dez3_Umwelt_Ordnung_Sport/36_Amt_fuer_Umweltschutz/Publikationen/
200910_Sofortma-nahmenprogramm_Klimanotstand_2020_FINAL.pdf (accessed on 30 November 2020). (in German).
City of Leipzig. Public Submission to the City Council on the Guidelines. 2012. Available online: http://english.leipzig.de/
fileadmin/mediendatenbank/leipzig-de/Stadt/02.6_Dez6_Stadtentwicklung_Bau/61_Stadtplanungsamt/Stadtentwicklung/
Leipzig_weiter_denken/OEffentliche_Vorlage_an_den_Stadtrat_zu_den_Leitlinien.pdf (accessed on 30 November 2020).
(in German).
City of Leipzig. City of Leipzig, Official Homepage of the Coordination Centre. 2020. Available online: https://english.leipzig.de/
services-and-administration/opportunities-for-residents-to-get-involved-and-make-a-difference/thinking-leipzig-ahead/
(accessed on 30 November 2020). (in English).
City of Leipzig. Official Homepage of the City Office. 2020. Available online: https://www.leipzig.de/buergerservice-undverwaltung/buergerbeteiligung-und-einflussnahme/stadtbuero/ (accessed on 30 November 2020). (in German).
City of Leipzig. Official Homepage of the Youth Parliament. 2020. Available online: https://jugendparlament.leipzig.de/
(accessed on 30 November 2020). (in German).
City of Leipzig. TRIANGULUM Local Project Activities. 2020. Available online: https://www.leipzig.de/bauen-und-wohnen/
stadterneuerung-in-leipzig/stadterneuerungsprojekte/eu-projekt-triangulum/ (accessed on 30 November 2020). (in German).
City of Leipzig. Energy-efficient Retrofitting Management (ESM). 2020. Available online: https://www.leipzig.de/bauen-undwohnen/foerdergebiete/klimaquartiere/ (accessed on 30 November 2020). (in German).
Seecon, DSK. Energy-Efficient Retrofitting Management Lindenau-Plagwitz. Final Report—Energetisches Sanierungsmanagement
Lindenau-Plagwitz. Endbericht; Seecon: Leipzig, Germany, 2018; non-public. (in German)
Seecon, DSK. Energy-Efficient Retrofitting Management Alt-Schönefeld. Final Report—Energetisches Sanierungsmanagement AltSchönefeld. Endbericht; Seecon: Leipzig, Germany, 2018; non-public. (in German)
City of Leipzig. Content and Participative Development of INSEK Leipzig 2030, Summary. 2020. Available online:
https://english.leipzig.de/construction-and-residence/urban-development/insek-leipzig-2030-integrated-urbandevelopment-concept/content-and-process/ (accessed on 30 November 2020). (in English).
City of Leipzig. Participative Development of INSEK Leipzig 2030. 2020. Available online: https://www.leipzig.de/bauenund-wohnen/stadtentwicklung/stadtentwicklungskonzept-insek/prozess-und-beteiligung/ (accessed on 30 November 2020).
(in German).
City of Leipzig. Detailed Documentation of the INSEK Participation Process. 2020. Available online: https://www.leipzig.de/
buergerservice-und-verwaltung/buergerbeteiligung-und-einflussnahme/leipzig-weiter-denken/beteiligen/leipzig-2030/ (accessed on 30 November 2020). (in German).
City of Leipzig. Official Homepage of Masterplan Green. 2020. Available online: https://www.leipzig.de/freizeit-kultur-undtourismus/parks-waelder-und-friedhoefe/masterplan-gruen/ (accessed on 30 November 2020). (in German).
City of Leipzig. Detailed Documentation of the Masterplan Green Participation Process. Available online: https://www.leipzig.
de/freizeit-kultur-und-tourismus/parks-waelder-und-friedhoefe/masterplan-gruen/beteiligungsprozess/ (accessed on 30
November 2020).
Saheb, Y.; Shnapp, S.; Paci, D. From Nearly-Zero Energy Buildings to Net-Zero Energy Districts—Lessons Learned from Existing EU
Projects; EUR 29734 EN.; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2019. [CrossRef]
Eurocities. The European Green Deal: Delivering Results for Citizens with Europe’s Cities. 2020. Available online: https://
eurocities.eu/latest/the-european-green-deal-delivering-results-for-citizens-with-europes-cities/ (accessed on 1 December 2020).

