energies
Article

Combining Sufficiency, Efficiency and Flexibility to Achieve
Positive Energy Districts Targets
Silvia Erba *

and Lorenzo Pagliano
eERG, End-Use Efficiency Research Group, Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milano, Italy; lorenzo.pagliano@polimi.it
* Correspondence: silvia.erba@polimi.it



Citation: Erba, S.; Pagliano, L.
Combining Sufficiency, Efficiency and

Abstract: Energy efficiency, generation from renewable sources and more recently energy flexibility
are key elements of present sustainability policies. However, we are beginning to see a recognition of
the need to couple technological solutions with lifestyle and behavioral changes, sometimes labeled
under the term “sufficiency”. Appropriate policies and design principles are necessary to enable
sufficiency options, which in turn reveal that there is a bidirectional influence between the building
and the district/city level. In this context, the authors discuss how city and building re-design should
be implemented combining energy efficiency, flexibility, production from renewables and sufficiency
options for achieving a positive energy balance at the district level even within the constraints
of dense cities. Based on a review of recent advances, the paper provides a matrix of interactions
between building and district design for use by building designers and city planners. It also compares
possible scenarios implementing different strategies at the building and urban level in a case study,
in order to evaluate the effect of the proposed integrated approach on the energy balance at yearly
and seasonal time scales and on land take.
Keywords: energy sufficiency; deep energy retrofit; energy flexibility; energy efficiency; building
thermal mass; positive energy district; yearly energy balance; seasonal energy balance

Flexibility to Achieve Positive Energy
Districts Targets. Energies 2021, 14,
4697. https://doi.org/10.3390/
en14154697
Academic Editors: Paola
Clerici Maestosi, Chi-Ming Lai and
Patrick E Phelan
Received: 1 May 2021
Accepted: 21 July 2021
Published: 3 August 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction
The challenge of sustainable development of urban areas is of key importance for the
European Union, which has defined an ambitious strategy and implementation plans to
make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable, in accordance with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development of the United Nations [1]. Ongoing and foreseen accelerated
urbanization in many areas of the world interacts with other challenges, including overpopulation, climate change, environmental quality and access to energy [2]. Urban and regional
planning is called to reassess how to sustainably supply the population with the needed
services at an affordable cost. Reflecting this, urban actors and scholars have created a
number of city labels, such as “sustainable city”, “smart city”, “green city” and “resilient
city”, to represent cities’ responses to various challenges of urban transformation. Among
them, the ‘smart city’ has prevailed as the most researched concept in the recent period [3],
even if it is sometimes presented as being focused only on the application of information
and communication technologies (ICTs) and leaving in the background a number of issues
related to building a physics and space and social organization. Most recently a “15 min
City” concept has been presented that proposes fundamental changes in urban planning
aimed at redesigning neighborhoods so that individuals can reach the school, workplace,
groceries, sport and recreational sites, etc., within a 15 min travel distance, either by bike
or on foot [4,5]. Each neighborhood should fulfil six social functions: living, working,
supplying, caring, learning and enjoying. The concept may have relevant implications on
energy and material use not only in the area of mobility, but also elsewhere, as we will
discuss in the paper.
The EU has been investing in sustainable urban development research for over twenty
years [6] and has recently announced the mission [7] to guide the transformation of 100 Eu-

Energies 2021, 14, 4697. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14154697

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

2 of 32

ropean cities to climate neutrality by 2030, supporting the cities through different financial
means, e.g., the new framework program Horizon Europe.
In particular, the area of “Smart City & Community” has been defined as strategic and
a priority since the previous European Horizon 2020 Program, which has funded numerous
projects to foster European Smart cities and communities, e.g., [8,9]. Over time, however, it
has been realized that financing large smart city projects at the urban level was complex
and with a huge demand for resources and investments. As an intermediate step, to be
achieved in a shorter time frame, a focus has been developed towards smaller urban areas,
such as districts.
In June 2018, the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET Plan), based also
on previous planning, has proposed an implementation plan on “Smart Cities and Communities” dedicated to develop 100 smart positive energy districts (PEDs) in Europe by 2025
(Action 3.2), characterized by improved sustainability, livability and going beyond carbon
neutrality. The Program on Positive Energy Districts and Neighborhoods (PED Program),
led by the intergovernmental Joint Programming Initiative (JPI) Urban Europe, has been
established to support this ambitious action, and has realized a review of early attempts
to PEDs in Europe [10]. The district approach is mentioned also within Article 19 of the
revised Energy Performance of Buildings Directive (2018/844) [11], which, also for the first
time, does not limit to energy use of buildings but underlines the link between buildings,
mobility and urban planning (recital 28 and article 8). Finally, the Horizon 2020 work
program [12] stresses the importance of deploying positive energy blocks and districts
by 2050 in Europe to achieve the needed energy transition in cities, in addition to foster
the integration between energy systems and improve the buildings’ energy performance
significantly beyond the levels of current EU codes.
Within the dedicated calls of the H2020 program, a definition for positive energy
blocks and districts is given: “Positive Energy Blocks/Districts consist of several buildings
. . . that actively manage their energy consumption and the energy flow between them and
the wider energy system. Positive Energy Blocks/Districts have an annual positive energy
balance”.
The PED Program has elaborated a framework definition, which also uses the concept
of yearly energy balance and extends from the urban to regional level the boundary of the
system where a positive value of the balance should be achieved: “Positive Energy Districts
are energy-efficient and energy-flexible urban areas, which produce net zero greenhouse
gas emissions and actively manage an annual local or regional surplus production of renewable energy.” [13]. However, according to Lindholm et al. [14] the concept of a positive
energy district is still in an early conceptual phase and research to exploit its value shall be
taken into account. PEDs may offer interesting replicability and scalability potentials [15],
thus it is crucial to identify clearly objectives, strengths and opportunities, via explicitly
and univocally defined indicators and with an explicit and structured calculation methodology [16]. A strong critique, backed by detailed optimization calculations, of the yearly
net zero energy metric is presented in [17]. The authors apply optimization for example
to a district made up of well-insulated apartments, heated by a heat pump and endowed
with PV panels and an electric battery. By optimizing with the objective of maximizing the
net generation over a year they find that the battery would not be utilized, since “battery
losses will result in net increase in electricity consumption compared with the no storage
case” hence damaging the yearly energy positivity goal. A conflict arises with the objective
of maximizing the use of renewable energy at the time when it is available, that is with the
objective of being “flexible” about the time when the district uses energy, either for direct
production of services or for storage and delayed use.
Comparing the above PED definitions, it can be observed that in the definition by the
PED Program a threefold objective is highlighted: energy-flexibility (though not quantitatively characterized), the target of positive energy balance and that of net zero greenhouse
gas emission, which recalls the concept of the zero emission neighborhood (ZEN) [18,19].
Regarding the target of net zero greenhouse gas emissions, it is worth noting that of the

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

3 of 32

29 districts in Europe that declared a PED ambition in the booklet under development by
JPI Urban Europe [10], 19 cases indicate at least one target between carbon neutrality, zero
emission or climate neutrality. According to the definitions reported in the IPCC Special
Report: Global Warming of 1.5 ◦ C [20], a carbon neutral goal refers to carbon dioxide
only, whereas a ‘net-zero’ target includes all greenhouse gases, and a ‘climate-neutral’ goal
extends to all causes of radiative forcing.
The framework definition distinguishes three main functions related to PEDs: energy
efficiency, energy flexibility and energy production.
Currently, energy efficiency and, more recently, energy flexibility drive the policy
practices to achieve high sustainability goals, e.g., a clever utilization of thermal mass
may allow one to manage the building as a thermal battery over a time frame of a few
days rather than hours, if the building fabric is highly insulated and high efficiency heat
recovery on ventilation is applied (as analyzed in Section 3 of this paper). Therefore,
in the case of existing buildings, the path of deep renovation focused first at improving
the building fabric can be a prerequisite enabler. This flexibility (in new or retrofitted
building fabrics) allows dealing with the challenges linked to the intermittent nature of
many renewable energy sources and their exploitation at the level of a cluster of buildings.
Given the need of a means of storage from the daily to the interseasonal scale, a strong
reduction of energy needs for heating and cooling via efficiency techniques and physical and
regulatory frameworks that enable low-energy life-styles (i.e., sufficiency, discussed in
detail in Section 4) might prove decisive. This would reduce the size of the required storage
and the connected embedded energy and energy losses.
At the same time, a strong reduction of energy needs and hence of the physical infrastructures required to serve those needs, appears as a fundamental step for achieving the
European and international goals related to halting land consumption. The United Nations
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) indicator 11.3.1: “Ratio of land consumption rate to
population growth rate” postulates that when this ratio is high, such a “growth turns out to
violate every premise of sustainability that an urban area could be judged by”. In Europe,
where population is projected to remain stable or even slightly declining throughout this
century [21], the EU institutions have taken a commitment to be “a frontrunner in implementing [ . . . ] the SDGs” and to aim at “no net land take by 2050” [22,23]. On 29 April
2021 the European Parliament approved with a majority of 605/660 a resolution asking the
EU Commission to draft a new directive for the protection of soil with the objectives of “no
land degradation” by 2030 and “no net land take” by 2050 at the latest.
Essential to reach the transformation of cities is the involvement of citizens and
stakeholders because of their central role in interacting with the buildings and the district’s
infrastructures. In this regard, we are beginning to see a recognition (e.g., in some of the
H2020 calls, in the IEA outlook 2020 [24], in chapter 5 of the upcoming IPCC report) of the
need to couple technological solutions with lifestyle and behavioral changes, sometimes
labeled under the term “sufficiency”. However, sufficiency is not simply an issue of choices
of each individual: sociological and psychological research indicates the need for enabling
infrastructures and social frameworks [25,26]. Hence, appropriate policies and design
principles are necessary to enable sufficiency options, which in turn reveal that there is a
bidirectional influence between the building and the district/city level.
In this context, the authors discuss how city and building redesign should be implemented combining efficiency, flexibility and renewables production with the emerging
new dimension of sufficiency options for achieving a positive energy balance at the district
level even within the constraints of dense cities (Figure 1). The paper focuses on the
buildings related aspect of the energy district while transports, public spaces and mobility
are discussed in terms of their interaction with building infrastructure.

Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

4 of 35

the district level even within the constraints of dense cities (Figure 1). The paper focuses
4 of 32
on the buildings related aspect of the energy district while transports, public spaces and
mobility are discussed in terms of their interaction with building infrastructure.

Schematization of the functions of a PED.
Figure 1. Schematization

2. Energy Efficiency
2. Energy Efficiency
One of the key elements frequently present in the current PED concepts is that the
One of the key elements frequently present in the current PED concepts is that the
district generates more renewable energy than it consumes on a yearly basis. This is
district
more renewable
renewableenergy
energysystems
than itand
consumes
on a yearly
basis. Thisthe
is
achievedgenerates
by integrating
energy storage
and improving
achieved
by
integrating
renewable
energy
systems
and
energy
storage
and
improving
the
energy efficiency of the district [14].
energy
of the district
Anefficiency
energy efficient
district[14].
will take into account the energy uses of different sectors
An
energy
efficient
district
into accountby
themixed
energy
uses
of relatively
different sectors
and building typologies and it will
willtake
be constituted
use
and
dense
and
building
and it will
be constituted
by mixed use and relatively dense
settlements
in typologies
order to minimize
transportation
needs.
settlements
to characterized
minimize transportation
Further,initorder
will be
by buildingsneeds.
with low energy needs for heating, cooling
Further,
it
will
be
characterized
by buildings
with low
energy
needs for
heating, service
cooling
and hot water, low energy use for lighting
and ventilation,
energy
efficient
building
and
hot
water,
low
energy
use
for
lighting
and
ventilation,
energy
efficient
building
service
systems, smart energy management and technologies and energy efficient street lighting.
systems,
energy
management
and technologies
and energy
streetefficiently
lighting.
The smart
directive
2012/27/EU
[27] requires
all EU countries
to useefficient
energy more
directive
[27]including
requires all
EU countries
to use
energy more
efficiently
at allThe
stages
of the 2012/27/EU
energy chain,
energy
generation,
transmission,
distribution
at
allend-use
stages of
the energy chain,
including
generation,
distribution
and
consumption.
In the 2018
recast energy
of the directive
[11], transmission,
the Commission
proposed
and
end-use energy
consumption.
In target
the 2018
recast
of the directive
[11],use
the
Commission
an ambitious
efficiency
by 2030,
regarding
final energy
(whichever
the
proposed
an
ambitious
energy
efficiency
target
by
2030,
regarding
final
energy
use
source, renewable or non-renewable) and primary energy, and more stringent revisions
(whichever
are ongoing.the source, renewable or non-renewable) and primary energy, and more
stringent
revisionsspecifically
are ongoing.
In addition,
for the building sector, the EU has established the Energy
In addition,
specifically
for the2010/31/EU
building sector,
EU hasin
established
Energy
Performance
of Building
Directive
[28],the
amended
2018 [11], the
which
sets
Performance
of Building
Directive
2010/31/EU
[28],the
amended
in energy
2018 [11],
which setsand
out
out policies and
supportive
measures
to improve
buildings
performance
policies
supportive
measures
improve
therequires
buildings
energy
performance
and
upgradeand
the existing
building
stock.toThe
directive
all new
buildings
(and major
upgrade
the existing
building
stock.from
The directive
all new
buildings
(and
major
retrofits) from
2021 (public
buildings
2019) to berequires
nearly-zero
energy
buildings
(nZEBs),
defined asfrom
buildings
retrofits)
2021 that:
(public buildings from 2019) to be nearly-zero energy buildings
(nZEBs),
defined
buildings
Have
a very as
high
energy that:
performance;

--

Cover,a very
to a very
extent, the nearly zero or very low amount of energy
Have
high significant
energy performance;
required by energy from renewable sources (including energy from renewable sources
produced on-site or nearby).

The detailed choice of indicators, rather than only of the numerical values to be
achieved, has been left to Member States. The resulting national implementations of the
nZEB concept are hence considerably different in terms of the selected indicators, which
makes it difficult to compare nZEBs in different countries [29–34].

-

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

Cover, to a very significant extent, the nearly zero or very low amount of energy
required by energy from renewable sources (including energy from renewable
sources produced on-site or nearby).

The detailed choice of indicators, rather than only of the numerical values to be
achieved, has been left to Member States. The resulting national implementations of5 the
of 32
nZEB concept are hence considerably different in terms of the selected indicators, which
makes it difficult to compare nZEBs in different countries [29–34].
EU has also promoted research dedicated to find out and clarify the best strategies
EU has alsosolutions
promotedtoresearch
to find out
and clarify
theabest
and technological
make thededicated
nZEBs affordable,
in order
to allow
rapidstrategies
market
and
technological
solutions
to
make
the
nZEBs
affordable,
in
order
to
allow
a
market
uptake and thus helping to achieve the EU’s energy and environmental goalsrapid
[32,35].
uptake
and
thus
helping
to
achieve
the
EU’s
energy
and
environmental
goals
[32,35].
According to ISO 52000-1 [36], the indicators to assess and design a nZEB should be
According
ISO
52000-1 [36],
the following
indicators order:
to assess
design
a nZEB
should
be
three and
shouldtobe
considered
in the
(1)and
energy
needs
for heating
and
three
and
should
be
considered
in
the
following
order:
(1)
energy
needs
for
heating
and
cooling,
cooling, to reflect the performance of the building fabric, quantifying and promoting the
to reflect of
theenergy
performance
of the building
fabric, quantifying
and promoting
the reduction
reduction
losses through
the envelope
and ventilation;
(2) total primary
energy,
of
energy
losses
through
the
envelope
and
ventilation;
(2)
total
primary
energy,
to reflect
the
to reflect the performance of the technical building systems; (3) non-renewable
primary
performance of the technical building systems; (3) non-renewable primary energy for quantienergy for quantifying and promoting the reduction of the non-renewable fraction within
fying and promoting the reduction of the non-renewable fraction within total primary energy
total primary energy use. Within the AZEB project, the authors have developed a series of
use. Within the AZEB project, the authors have developed a series of simplified graphical
simplified graphical illustrations (Figure 2) and a video to show in a clear and concise way
illustrations (Figure 2) and a video to show in a clear and concise way the above concepts
the above concepts and nomenclature [35]. The indicators energy needs and total primary
and nomenclature [35]. The indicators energy needs and total primary energy do respond to
energy do respond to the energy efficiency first (EEF) principle, which is one of the key
the energy efficiency first (EEF) principle, which is one of the key principles of the Energy
principles of the Energy Union, intended to ensure secure, sustainable, competitive and
Union, intended to ensure secure, sustainable, competitive and affordable energy supply in
affordable energy supply in the EU. The parameter non-renewable primary energy responds
the EU. The parameter non-renewable primary energy responds to the objective of “increasto the objective of “increasing the share of renewables”. Reducing energy needs will not
ing the share of renewables”. Reducing energy needs will not reduce the necessity of (and
reduce the necessity of (and the market for) renewables and controls. On the contrary, it
the market for) renewables and controls. On the contrary, it constitutes an indispensable
constitutes an indispensable prerequisite for these to be deployed with effective and
prerequisite for these to be deployed with effective and acceptable results from the social
acceptable
results from
theofsocial
environmental
point of view,
the EU
and environmental
point
view,and
including
the EU objective
of zeroincluding
“land take”,
and
objective
of
zero
“land
take”,
and
therefore
for
their
rapid
penetration.
therefore for their rapid penetration.

Figure 2. Graphical representation of energy levels developed by the authors (S. Erba and L. Pagliano):
case where the energy service considered is space heating, delivered by a boiler and on-site solar
thermal panels.

To move beyond the concept of nZEB to that of PED, it should be followed a similar
rational sequence of steps, starting by reducing the overall energy use of the district, then
covering this use fully with renewables, by making it flexible in order to accommodate
short term fluctuations in RES supply, creating an interseasonal storage infrastructure, and
providing a set of RES coherent with the territory. On this line, the technical report by the
European Commission Joint Research Centre [37] suggests to extend the application of the

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

6 of 32

minimum energy performance requirements by the EPBD from the building’s to the cluster
of buildings’ level, keeping the priority on the EEF principle.
Different examples of energy efficient districts are spreading in Europe, characterized
by the presence of high performance buildings, which act as a starting point to reduce the
overall energy use of the neighborhood, e.g., in the Carquefou district (Nantes), FranceFleuriaye West, all of the new residential buildings are certified Passivhaus [38] and due
to the correct orientation of the housing units, the careful design of the envelope, the
proper management of solar heat gains and the exploitation of night ventilation, they are
able to minimize the energy needs for heating and cooling guaranteeing thermal comfort
throughout the year. The choice of energy efficient equipment allows one to further
reduce the electric energy use. In Bærum, Norway-Fornebu [39], all the buildings will
be nZEB, with the minimum passive house standard and energy class A. In addition, all
buildings should be certified according to BREEAM-NOR Excellent. In Bodø, NorwayNyBy Buildings are planned to be built according to the ZEB standard [40].
In a PED not only new constructions but also existing buildings need to be addressed.
Presently, roughly 75% of the EU building stock is energy inefficient and the poorly
insulated buildings are not suitable for effectively helping the logic of positive energy
districts. “Deep renovations” are a necessary condition to allow the building to modulate
demand and provide flexibility to the network, as we discuss in Section 3. A unique
definition of “deep renovation” or “deep energy renovation” is still not available; however,
the literature offers studies and benchmarks that allow one to identify the main targets of
this strategy [41–43]. A report by the European Parliament (30 July 2012), states that “deep
renovation means a refurbishment that reduces both the delivered and the final energy
consumption of a building by at least 80% compared with the pre-renovation levels” [44].
To reach and verify these goals, the process should start with the assessment of the
existing building performance, proceeding with the design (preferably the codesign in
multiproperty buildings), the construction, the commissioning, the management and operation of the building. Recent deep retrofits have proven the possibility to reduce the
energy need for heating to 15–20 kWh/(m2 ·y) even with a limited budget as often is the case
in social housing [8]. However, concern has been expressed about the effectiveness of
energy efficiency upgrades in bringing about the level of energy savings foreseen at the
design stage [45]. The energy performance gap and prebound and rebound effects are
often reported when dealing with energy efficiency upgrades and there is relatively ample
literature on the subject [46]. To measure and verify the actual building performance,
i.e., the energy performance and the indoor environmental quality (IEQ), measurement
and verification (M&V) protocols should be implemented after the design phase of a new
construction or a building retrofit. Since 1996, when EVO published the so called “International Performance Measurement and Verification Protocol” (IPMVP) [47], different
guidelines and procedures have been developed to verify that a building performs according to design expectations, suggest energy saving measures to be adopted to further
improve the building performance or to facilitate operation and maintenance. Specific
work has been developed to define M&V plans for ZEBs [48] and more recently addressing
zero energy settlements [49]. One of the increasingly discussed solutions to mitigate the
performance gap is to enhance the awareness of the consumer and encourage a more
efficient and sustainable energy-saving behavior at the building [50] and district level. It
should be noticed that some measurement campaigns show good agreement between the
predicted and actual performance in the case of Passivhaus buildings, which might be a
consequence of a particularly accurate design and execution under this voluntary label.
A recent report by the Universite de Geneve and SUPSI [51] finds that for the buildings
labeled Minergie A and Minergie P, “the analysis yields a negative Energy Performance
Gap (EPG) of −14% (i.e., the median building consumes slightly less than its standard),
which provides further support for the initial hypothesis that the most efficient buildings
are more robust to the EPG”.

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

7 of 32

Currently there is no formalized standard to calculate an energy balance applied at
the district scale but the literature offers the first attempts to define methodologies for
the development of positive energy district targets and optimization techniques [16,37].
According to Shnapp et al. [37], the EPBD’s cost-optimality calculation methodology, set
up to calculate the minimum performance of individual buildings in MS regulation, might
be adapted to establish minimum district performance requirements for zero or positive
energy district solutions. We notice here that presently the cost-optimal methodology does
not include external costs (including damage due to local pollution and climate change),
which are large and increasing, and hence its adaptation to a wider context should in our
view include explicitly those “negative externalities” in its calculation methodology [52,53].
Gabaldón et al. [16] have proposed a methodology to support cities at the design
stage of a district evaluating its annual energy balance. It follows the approach of the ISO
52000 standard and it is made of eight steps: after the definition of the PED boundaries, the
energy needs are calculated and followed by a series of iterative steps that finish calculating
the equivalent primary energy, the primary energy balance and an associated Sankey
diagram. The primary energy balance is defined in the paper as the difference between
the non-renewable primary energy delivered to the district and the renewable primary energy
that is exported outside the PED’s boundaries. The authors also warn that “Because it is
possible to achieve a Positive Energy District through an unrealistic system (as huge on-site
generation, to give an example), a standardized calculation is needed similar to the nZEB
rating, where lowering the energy needs is a first requisite to certifying the building (and by
extension a district)“.
Both at the district and building level a general critique holds with respect of an
energy balance performed over a year when compensation is allowed between different
time steps: it allows one to compensate for continued fossil use in some moments (e.g.,
winter) with overproduction of RES at other times (e.g., summer) This obviously does
not lead to zero emissions and requires potentially large interseasonal storage locally or
somewhere in the network, with associated land occupation, energy losses and use of
materials, embedded energy and related costs. Additionally, the fact of choosing a long
time interval for the energy balance creates a conflict with other objectives, e.g., the selfconsumption of renewables as already mentioned [17]. As for buildings, some MS such
as Italy and Spain have opted for running the balance with only partial compensations,
meaning that compensation happens within months but not between different months.
Additionally, in fact lower time periods for compensation might be chosen in case more
detailed calculation methods [54] would be adopted for the energy certification (e.g., when
hourly calculation methods would be adopted) rather than the most current monthly
calculation method. A similar method to limit the negative effects of the simplistic yearly
balance should be adopted also in performing the energy balance of a district. We offer an
example of the issues in the case study presented in Section 5.
3. Energy Flexibility
Demand for energy flexibility is increasing due to the growing penetration of variable
renewable energy sources into the energy system. Among non-dispatchable sources, solar
power and wind power contribute noticeably to the electrical grid and a generation above a
30% share in annual electricity consumption strongly increases flexibility requirements [55].
This creates a challenge for the energy use in buildings to become in the future flexible,
capable to adapt to the needs of the network and renewable production, maintaining
standards related to comfort and low operating costs.
Different ways of obtaining energy flexibility can be listed such as the building thermal
mass, which can be utilized to store energy, active storage systems such as domestic hot
water (DHW) storage and buffer tanks, chemical batteries, connection to more energy
networks, etc. [56].
The revised EPBD [11] highlights the importance of buildings’ energy flexibility in
relation to the development of a smart readiness indicator, which will assess the techno-

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

8 of 32

logical readiness of buildings to adapt in response to the occupant’s needs, to be flexible
according to the needs of the grid and to facilitate maintenance and efficient operation.
It requires that one of the key functionalities of smart readiness in buildings is “the
flexibility of a building’s overall electricity demand, including its ability to enable participation in active and passive and implicit and explicit demand-response, in relation to the
grid, for example through flexibility and load shifting capacities.”.
Individual buildings or clusters of buildings can provide flexibility. Annex 67 [56] defines the energy flexibility of a building as “the ability to manage its demand and generation
according to local climate conditions, user needs, and energy network requirements. It will
thus allow for demand side management/load control and thereby demand response based
on the requirements of the surrounding energy networks”. Compared to a single building,
the flexibility and use of new technologies can in principle be increased by focusing at
the district level [57,58] since this might ensure a larger accommodation of RES supply
systems and easily flatten the load profiles due to the presence of different occupancy
patterns and a potential variety of RES sources and heat sinks (e.g., soil, water bodies, night
sky and night ventilation in summer). Besides, a larger scale might offer economies of
scale in the case of retrofit actions aggregating groups of buildings and options for energy
production and storage, which may not be economically or practically suitable in the case
of a single building.
In the literature, a consolidated definition of the energy flexible district is missing;
however, different concepts are available to describe the synergy of energy efficient buildings and renewable energy utilization at an aggregated level. In particular, Vigna et al. [59]
focused their review on the characterization of the concept of energy flexible building
cluster, defining it as a group of buildings interconnected to the same energy infrastructure,
which should be able to manage their generation, storage and consumption in response to
forcing factors with the aim to exploit as much as possible RES while reducing CO2 emissions. As noted, those objectives are not coincident with the objective of net (or positive)
zero energy over a year.
Among the different systems that can compete to determine energy flexibility we
highlight in this paper the potential for energy storage of the buildings’ envelope and
structural elements, which allows it to accumulate energy when the demand is low in order
to reduce it during peak periods. The aim of this analysis is to show the energy demand
management ability of different types of buildings to allow preliminary evaluations of
the potential within a district, which can include a mix of highly insulated buildings
with large time constants and poorly insulated buildings with smaller time constants
(as it might happen in historical centers where some buildings present limitations for
external insulation). Different studies have shown the potential of structural thermal mass
in achieving flexibility. The majority of the studies uses dynamic modeling to identify
this potential [60–70]. Fewer studies have been implemented through the realization of
experimental campaigns [71–74]. We provide in this paper (Section 5) the findings from
a case study of a multifamily residential building located in Milan, Italy, which has been
assessed via modeling and verified through experimental tests. We chose to focus the
attention on the potential linked to the thermal mass since it can be considered as a “passive”
thermal storage, whose cost is already paid off by energy savings, requiring just one extra
investment, i.e., appropriate controllers of the heating system.
The principle underpinning the exploitation of the building thermal mass, e.g., in
winter is to increase the building set point indoor temperature to accumulate heat when
energy/electricity locally generated by renewables is available and to decrease it when
the power production is too low. However, at the same time, it is necessary to guarantee
adequate comfort conditions for the users, which can be controlled by keeping the operative
temperature within the limits of the occupants’ thermal comfort range as derived from
comfort models and made explicit, e.g., in comfort standards (EN 16798 [75] and ASHRAE
55 [76]).

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

9 of 32

Le Dréau and Heiselberg [63] evaluated the use of thermal mass to modulate the
energy use of the heating system, comparing poorly versus highly insulated buildings
through energy modeling. They showed that poorly insulated buildings can modulate
a large amount of heat only for short periods of time (2–5 h). Contrarily, well-insulated
buildings are able to modulate a smaller amount of heat but they can maintain acceptable
indoor comfort conditions after a complete switch-off of the heating systems for more than
one day. Similarly in [67] they applied an energy flexibility index to show that poorly
insulated houses are less energy flexible than well insulated ones. A proper level of thermal
insulation allows one to reduce the energy needs for heating and to recover a greater share
of the accumulated thermal energy. Their analyses show that the insulation level in a
building has the key role in determining its energy flexibility compared to the building’s
total thermal inertia, the type of heat emitter or the kind of additional indoor thermal mass.
Additionally, Foteinaki et al. [61] have highlighted similar conclusions quantifying, e.g., in
more than two days, the period of time during which a low-energy single-family house is
able to maintain the temperature above 20 ◦ C, after the heat supply is interrupted.
Currently, a significant part of the existing building stock is still characterized by
buildings with low energy performance, which in winter require energy generally in the
same morning time slot after the night attenuation. For this reason, it is important to couple
this strategy with the deep energy retrofit of the buildings.
4. Energy Sufficiency
The concept of “sufficiency” was introduced by a number of researchers both from the
energy and the sociology fields, following the energy crises of the 1970s and 1980s [77,78];
in the 1990s it was brought into the sustainability debate by W. Sachs: “A society in
balance with nature can in fact only be approximated through a twin-track approach:
through both intelligent rationalization of means and prudent moderation of ends” [79]
and “While efficiency is about doing things right, sufficiency is about doing the right
things” [80]. Since then the concept has been the subject of a rather large body of academic
research [81], sometimes under different terminology frameworks. A recent review of
concepts and terminology is offered in [82], which summarizes: “ . . . Samadi et al. [83]
make a distinction between efficiency, consistency and sufficiency defined as follows:
“efficiency is an option in which the input-output relation is improved . . . consistency aims
at fundamental changes in production and consumption by substituting non-renewable
resources with renewable resources . . . [and] sufficiency is linked to the level of demand for
goods and services”. This distinction can be compared with the distinctions of the avoidshift-improve (ASI) framework [84]: improve matches with efficiency and technological
substitution (i.e., consistency), while shift and avoid correspond to lifestyle change (i.e.,
sufficiency)” (see Table 1).
Table 1. Schematic comparison of different types of behavior changes, adapted by authors from [82].
Integrated
Assessment Models
(IAM) Distinction

Efficiency

(Technological)
Substitution

Lifestyle Change

EFFICIENCY

CONSISTENCY

SUFFICIENCY

Transport

Fuel-efficient vehicles

Vehicles powered from
RES

Public transport

Teleconferencing,
walking, cycling

Residential

Energy-efficient
appliances (high level
in energy labeling)

On-site generation by
RES

Thermostat adjustment

Smaller apartments,
reduced number and
size of appliances

Consumer goods and
services

Efficient supply chain

Purchase sustainable
goods

Sustainable use of
goods

Sharing goods

Shift

Avoid

Improve

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

10 of 32

Recently, the sufficiency concept has been incorporated as a key element into the
Energy Plan 2020–2030 of the State of Genève, under the French name “sobrietè” [85], it
has been included into the French Law for Energy Transition (2015) on equal footing with
energy efficiency and has appeared as an element of future energy scenarios in the analysis
of international bodies officially appointed to deal with energy (IEA) and climate (IPCC).
The latest World Energy Outlook by the International Energy Agency introduces
explicitly sufficiency actions, described there with the term “behaviour changes”, and
their effect on energy use between 2020 and 2030 [24]. IEA included in its list various
sufficiency actions, e.g., changing the thermostat settings for summer and winter, linedrying clothes, walking and cycling, working from home, car-sharing, etc. The next
Advancement Report (AR6) by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is
expected to cover demand-side solutions in a new chapter (Chapter 5 of the WGIII: Demand,
services, and social aspects of mitigation) where “demand refers to end-use demand
for services, such as nutrition, mobility, thermal comfort and lighting. It emphasizes
services rather than consumption as essential dimension to guarantee constituents of
wellbeing” [84,86]. Concrete examples of communities embracing the concept of physical
limits, rather than simply of “doing more with less” via technical efficiency, are, e.g., the
cities of Amsterdam and Brussels, which have adopted the “doughnut” concept proposed
by ecological economist Kate Raworth [87] in which the outer ring of the diagram represents
Earth’s environmental ceiling, a place where the collective use of resources has an adverse
impact on the planet. Lower energy use, though, should not be confused with lower welfare
levels, nor with a concept of restriction or deprivation, either voluntary or imposed [88]. A
wealth of research shows that the growth in the use of energy and materials has in many
countries reached levels where this use becomes dysfunctional and detrimental to general
and individual welfare [89,90], due to its impacts on, e.g., in the case of the large reliance on
private cars, “physical inactivity, obesity, death and injury from crashes, cardio- respiratory
disease from air pollution, noise, community severance and climate change” [91,92]. Recent
work quantifies, on the contrary, the economic benefits of reducing space devoted to cars
in favor of green areas [93,94] and the negative outcomes of affluence.
It should also be noted that change in the end-use demand for services/sufficiency
is not simply an issue of personal investment choices and behavioral changes at the
individual level: sociological research indicates the need for enabling infrastructures and
social frameworks [25,95]. This is also summarized in a UNEP report on “sustainable
lifestyle” [96]: “A ‘sustainable lifestyle’ is a cluster of habits and patterns of behavior
embedded in a society and facilitated by institutions, norms and infrastructures that frame
individual choice, in order to minimize the use of natural resources and generation of
wastes, while supporting fairness and prosperity for all”. Hence, we explored in this
section, institutions, norms and infrastructures that can foster energy sufficiency actions
(sometimes overlapping with energy efficiency actions/technologies) at the building and
district/city level showing that those two levels are strictly connected.
4.1. Designing (Spaces and Legislation) for Sufficiency
4.1.1. Comfort Scenarios, including Air Velocity and Ceiling Fans
A tendency to develop an architecture fully detached from the external environment
and to aim at maintaining internal spaces strictly controlled in terms of temperature and
humidity and with essentially zero air movement has dominated the second part of the XX
century and the start of the XXI. This was paralleled by a rather narrow interpretation, by
the construction and systems industry, of the then predominant comfort model, developed
by Fanger [97], proposed for application in mechanically controlled environments. In
reality the model allows for a rather large range of temperatures, also depending on
clothing and chair insulation and activity levels, and does not mandate for a narrow range
of humidity. Fanger states that “the influence of humidity [on comfort] is small” and
presents calculations and graphs showing that a change of 1% R.H. produces changes of
1/100 to 1/1000 of a unit of PMV [97], while the comfort range spans from −1 to +1 in

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

11 of 32

terms of PMV [97]. At the same time the adaptive comfort model has been developed
based on a large body of data in real buildings [98,99] and was included in standards
(EN 16798 [75] and ASHRAE 55 [76]) for non-mechanically conditioned spaces and for
conditioned spaces when systems are turned off. The necessity for an extension of the
PMV model was acknowledged also by Fanger [100]. The adaptive comfort model, which
proposes a linear positive correlation of summer indoor comfort temperature with the
average outdoor temperature in the previous week, allows for lower energy needs when
compared to a restrictive interpretation and application of the PMV model [101], while
providing comfort, based on an a very large database of measurements and surveys [99,102].
Finally the role of air velocity in providing comfort in the warm season at temperatures
higher than calculated with the PMV formula has been confirmed in a long series of
experiments and included in both EN 16798 and ASHRAE 55. By adopting higher air
temperatures during warm seasons, building operators may reduce HVAC energy use by
approximately 7–10 percent per degree Celsius of temperature increase [103].
However, in spite of the fact that results from over 35,000 occupant surveys contained
in the ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database [99] show that occupants prefer more
air movement than they are currently experiencing in buildings, designers still have little
guidance for designing rooms with ceiling fans (spacing, sizing and cooling effect) [104]
and rarely ceiling fans are considered in the energy concept at the design stage and actually
installed and coordinated with the lighting design. A new design and sizing tool has been
created and made available by the Berkeley group [105], which also provided results and
analysis from the largest study to date of air speeds generated by ceiling fans [106].
The possibility to apply (as a user of a building as much as a designer of a building)
efficiency/sufficiency measures such as night ventilation in summer nights [107] and use
ceiling fans during the day instead of (or to reduce use of) air-conditioning depends on
explicit recognition at the regulation level of the following issues:
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

In summer, the same level of thermal comfort, as measured, e.g., via the index
predicted mean vote (PMV), can be achieved via various combinations of the physical
parameters (operative temperature, relative humidity and air velocity), each scenario
leading to different values of energy need for cooling and energy need for dehumidification
(if any) [101,108].
The choice of the comfort category (I, II or III according to EN 16798-1, formerly
known as EN 15251, or A, B and C according to ASHRAE 55), which is aimed at the
building design and/or controls that strongly affect energy needs [109].
A number of research works show that comfort category I (A), which is the more
energy demanding, cannot be perceived subjectively [110] and it is below the accuracy
of measurements [111]. In the EU standard (EN 16798-1), category I (A) is reserved
to buildings occupied by people with special needs (children, elderly, persons with
disabilities, etc.), but it may nevertheless be perceived by designers and presented to
clients/operators as the “best” condition.
An important parameter affecting comfort in the warm season is the insulation level of
clothing and of furniture, as e.g., office chairs (both measured in the unit clo and with
indicative values reported e.g., in ISO 7730 [112]). Regulation and cultural norms may
actively and explicitly promote the adoption of dressing codes where light clothing
in summer is the norm rather than the exception (see e.g., the Cool Biz program in
Japan [113]) and office furniture is chosen with low thermal insulation.

4.1.2. Using Energy Needs and Total Primary Energy as Indicators and Following the
“Priority Order” Foreseen in the Standard EN-ISO 52000
A situation where all the actors involved in the development of efficiency/sufficiency
measures in the field, regulators and policymakers use consistently the same set of physical
concepts, definitions and nomenclature would ensure better final results in terms of comfort
levels and energy use and would be a prerequisite for devising clear guidelines for design
and construction focused on allowing sufficient behavior and operation. The necessity of

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

12 of 32

using a unified nomenclature in legislation and regulation has been stated very explicitly
in a report commissioned by the European Commission on ZEB definition [32] and has
been supported in the scientific literature [34] and EU projects [31]. The Standard ISO
EN 52000-1 [36] explains which indicators are needed (energy needs for heating and cooling,
total primary energy use and non-renewable primary energy use) and why (see Section 2. Energy Efficiency). The indicators energy needs for heating and cooling and total primary energy
do respond to the “energy efficiency first” principle and to the aim of quantifying the effect
of sufficiency actions, while the indicator non-renewable primary energy use responds to the
objective of “increasing the share of renewables”. Lowering the value of those indicators
via improvements of the building fabric, by providing a more uniform comfort in spaces
and reducing the daily fluctuations of temperature facilitates the adoption of sufficiency
actions by occupants of buildings (e.g., adapting clothing, prioritizing use of fans over air
conditioning, etc.), which would not be possible in buildings with a poor quality of opaque
and transparent envelope components.
4.1.3. Integration of Actions at the Building and District Level
Design of buildings as guided by building codes and city planning are still to a large
extent dealt separately. On the contrary, sufficiency (and efficiency) actions in buildings
are strongly connected with enabling/hindering conditions in cities. An overview of
interactions between districts and buildings favoring efficiency and sufficiency actions and
the necessary supporting urban design and regulation is presented in Table 2.
Table 2. Interactions between districts and buildings favoring efficiency and sufficiency actions and supporting urban
design choices and regulation.

Sufficiency Actions
in Buildings→

Summer Night
Ventilation and
Ceiling Fans Rather
Than Air
Conditioning

Summer Night
Ventilation Rather
Than Air
Conditioning

Adequate m2 per
Capita Floor Space

Adopt “Sufficient”
Mobility Modes:
Bicycle, Walk,
Public Transport

Line Drying and
Water/Hot Water
Saving

External air
temperature < 20 ◦ C
at night

Pleasant common
indoor/outdoor
spaces (shared guest
rooms, music rooms,
office space, playing
spaces for children,
etc.) to reduce the
need for individual
volumes

Easy access to
services, schools,
work and coworking
spaces, equally
distributed in the
city; independence of
movement for
children and elders

Well-designed spaces
for line-drying,
installed water
saving devices.
Comfortable showers
in place of bathtubs

Distance between
functions,
unacceptable risks for
cyclists, pedestrians
and persons with
disabilities

Dust in air

Equitable access to
street space and
equal access to
various
transportation modes

Information
campaigns on water
saving devices and
on the high quality of
drinking water from
the tap

EPBD (and national
build codes):
mandatory protected
spaces inside
buildings for bicycles,
wheelchairs and
strollers

Mandatory spaces for
line drying,
mandatory labeling
of low-flow water
devices, mandatory
showers rather or in
addition to bathtubs
(with access at the
same level of the
floor for easy access
by aging population)

In order to perform
sufficiency actions,
inhabitants would
need→

Silence at night, clean
air

Presently cities create
constraints→

Noise, mainly from
cars and motorcycles.
PM10, PM2.5
pollution and other
air contaminants

Asphalt, city canyons

Inhospitable districts,
obligation for car
parking spaces at
buildings and free car
parking on streets

Cities should offer
enabling
conditions→

Car-free residential
districts and zones at
20 or 30 km/h

White/cool surfaces.
Geometries
facilitating air
movement. Water
surfaces and urban
vegetation

Walkable, cyclable
districts, green
spaces, spaces for
playing and spaces in
the building for
common activities

Legislation and
Regulation
shouldaddress→

Objective and
adequate
temperature and
humidity set-points
in regulation.
Limitations to car
number and to speed
limits to 20–30 km/h

Mandatory
white/cool surfaces,
mandatory external
solar protections (as,
e.g., in Switzerland)

Minimum
requirements of
green spaces and of
common spaces for
meetings

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

13 of 32

Natural Ventilation and Ventilative Cooling Need Silence and Clean Air; Interactions with
Mobility Planning
In the district of Florés Malacca, a group of buildings offers a recent example [114]
of holistic planning of buildings and districts. Orientation of buildings and shape and
openings of each apartments take advantage of dominant Alisee wind for achieving cross
ventilation and cooling the building fabric at night. Ceiling fans are an integral part of
the comfort concept. The presence of cars has been limited to an underground parking in
order to achieve an acoustically quiet environment allowing the opening of windows for
natural ventilation for a large fraction of time without acoustic discomfort and degradation
of indoor air quality (IAQ) by external pollution.
Recent actions in large cities (e.g., Paris) aimed at creating opportunities for walking
and cycling (in parallel to limiting individual motorized vehicles use and speed) and
increasing green areas might allow for better opportunities also in the use of buildings, as
in the previous example. Solar protection of streets and small squares is relatively common
in some towns in the South of Spain and Portugal and by lowering the air temperature
in the street canyon might allow for better conditions for night summer ventilation. The
use of spaces for introducing vegetation and low solar absorptance surfaces, if practiced at
a large scale, can reduce the heat island effect [115] and maintain the potential for using
night ventilation as an effective passive cooling technique.
Analyses performed by the Department of Architecture and Urban Studies of Politecnico di Milano [116,117] show how a combination of diffused coworking spaces and safe
biking infrastructure might allow a practice of “near working” coherent with the idea of
“15 min city”.
One important feature of some of the above described actions (e.g., shifting mode to
walking and cycling for the short-mid range, relocating some type of work) is the fact that
they can be implemented quite quickly; some of them have very low cost [118] and deploy
effects in a very short time span [119], which are now available in order to limit emissions
quickly enough to remain in the 1.5 ◦ C carbon budget [120]. Just between 2011 and 2016 the
world has wasted 200 out of 365 GtCO2 of the available 1.5 ◦ C CO2 budget to 2100 [121].
Common Spaces and Dedicated Spaces for Line Drying and Bike Sheltering
Common spaces within buildings favor conviviality and cohesion and may reduce
the need for excessively large private (conditioned) spaces. e.g., the Geneve Plan (2000 W)
foresees the promotion of common spaces, the rationalization of empty private spaces via
“la multifonctionnalité des espaces, le partage et le recyclage de l’espace, des équipements
et des biens; la pratique du coworking, le télétravail, les coopératives d’habitation, les
colocations”. Common, car-free spaces outdoors (in particular green spaces) can also
offer an important alternative to indoor spaces for many activities (e.g., children playing
activities, elderly people physical exercise and social interaction) and, hence, deliver
multiple benefits (reduced need of indoor-conditioned spaces, reduced pollution and noise
and surfaces to be dedicated to heat island effect mitigation [122]). Green spaces between
the buildings, on the roof and some facades, help reduce the air and surface radiant
temperatures and hence create better conditions for effective summer night ventilation.
A provision for spaces adequate to line drying outdoors (on facades, balconies and
roofs) and well designed for convenience and aesthetic can enable this practice, very
relevant in terms of energy saving (drying a kilogram of clothes indoors or with a drying
machine can be 3–5 times more energy expensive than washing it, due to the high value of
the heat of vaporization of water).
Spaces for bike sheltering for all new buildings and renovations (in place of the current
practice of imposing car-parking spaces) may support the modal shift and liberate public
space for the common uses. The 2018 Energy Performance of Buildings Directive recast [11]
calls MS to promote bike sheltering and holistic, coherent urban planning (article 8 and
recital 28).

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

14 of 32

(Hot) Water Savings
Voluntary labeling schemes are available for taps and showers (e.g., the Water Efficiency Label, the Swiss Energy Label for Sanitary Fittings and the European Water Label
scheme) and could potentially apply to almost all products used in domestic and nondomestic applications. A variety of water saving devices are available on the market:
low flow shower heads and taps, asymmetric commands for avoiding unwanted use of
hot water and devices with timers. Particularly effective are devices with the aeration
mechanism that make use of the Venturi principle: while water passes through a restriction,
its pressure is lowered below atmospheric pressure. Such a depression sucks in a certain
amount of air, which mixes with the water, increasing its apparent volume. As an order
of magnitude, the water consumption is reduced by 40–50% with respect to a traditional
shower at parity of the “volume” feeling. The tendency to install showers rather than
bathtubs may also be favored in new design and retrofits with the objectives of encouraging
a lower use of water, of facilitating access to the elderly people (especially in places like EU
where population is aging) and of saving conditioned space.
Drain Water Heat Recovery
Various heat exchanger typologies are available on the market to recover thermal
energy from the water outflow of showers, bathtubs and sinks and preheat incoming water,
e.g., in the gravity falling-film method, surface tension and gravity cause falling films of
water to adhere to the inner wall of a vertical drainpipe, thus enabling a high rate of heat
transfer. The cold water from the aqueduct passes through a coil that is tightly wrapped
around the vertical drainpipe. This system can recover 45–65% of the available heat in
the wastewater. In cases that a vertical pipe proves difficult to install, horizontal heat
exchangers are available, with slightly lower efficacy. The system cost effectiveness is
obviously higher in the cases of a large use of water as, e.g., in sport facilities [123].
5. The Case Study of the Chiaravalle District in Milan, Italy
5.1. Description of the Case Study
We present here a case study of transformation of an existing district into a PED
where part of the measures have been already successfully realized with the retrofit of
multiapartment social housing buildings and a part is under analysis/planning. We
performed a “what if” analysis comparing two scenarios:
-

Scenario (A) under which only active systems were upgraded/installed (heat pumps
and PV) and there was no change in energy needs/uses;
Scenario (B) where a series of efficiency measures and sufficiency enablers were
implemented thus strongly reducing the energy needs/uses; in addition, active systems
were upgraded/installed.

A strong focus was given to measures for summer comfort in the expectation of a
further increase of temperature and exacerbation of the heat island effect. We compared
the effects under both a yearly and seasonal (winter/summer) balanced approach and
estimated the resulting land take necessary for achieving a zero (or positive) energy balance.
The Chiaravalle district is located in the southern periphery of Milan, Italy, at the
border with the Parco Agricolo Sud Milano nature reserve. The size of the project area is
around 330,000 m2 , comprising a monastery, public and private residential units, public
offices, restaurants, hotels and public spaces (Figure 3).

Energies 2021, 14, 4697
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW

15 of 32
16 of 35

Figure 3.
3. Map
Mapof
ofChiaravalle
Chiaravalledistrict,
district,
Milan,
Italy:
in red
public
housing
blocks
are highlighted.
The analyses
perFigure
Milan,
Italy:
in red
the the
public
housing
blocks
are highlighted.
The analyses
performed
formed by the authors are referred to complex A but the results can be extended to complex B, because of their similarities.
by the authors are referred to complex A but the results can be extended to complex B, because of their similarities.

Despite
has
maintained
thethe
character
of an
Despite being
beingannexed
annexedtotoMilan,
Milan,Chiaravalle
Chiaravalle
has
maintained
character
of auan
tonomous
town.
The
district
is
separated
from
the
urban
agglomeration
of
the
city
by
the
autonomous town. The district is separated from the urban agglomeration of the city
park
and
thisand
isolation
is reinforced
by the scarcity
of public
to the centre.
by the
park
this isolation
is reinforced
by the scarcity
of transportation
public transportation
to the
The
district
is undergoing
renovation
in the in
framework
of several
EU projects
(e.g.,(e.g.,
EUcentre.
The district
is undergoing
renovation
the framework
of several
EU projects
Gugle,
SharingCities
and and
SATO—self
assessment
towards
optimization
of building
enEU-Gugle,
SharingCities
SATO—self
assessment
towards
optimization
of building
ergy)
aimed
to to
rehabilitate
the
energy)
aimed
rehabilitate
thearea
areastarting
startingfrom
fromthe
thedeep
deepenergy
energyretrofit
retrofit and
and the
the energy
optimization of four residential apartment blocks (highlighted in red in Figure
Figure 3).
3).
They
They are public housing blocks, consisting of L-shaped buildings with four stories
each. This
This kind
kind of housing represents an important share of the national public building
stock;
built
in in
thethe
1970s
andand
1980s
andand
havehave
never
beenbeen
renstock; most
mostof
ofthese
thesebuildings
buildingswere
were
built
1970s
1980s
never
ovated,
thus
presenting
both
poor
energy
renovated,
thus
presenting
both
poor
energyperformance
performanceand
andserious
seriousIAQ
IAQ problems.
problems. The
needed retrofit has been carefully planned and executed without moving the occupants
needed
occupants
out of their apartments.
We focused the analysis on the complex A (Figure 3),
3), but the results can be extended
to the complex B, since the buildings are characterized by a similar shape and materials
and have undergone the same type of retrofit. A number of similar buildings are present
the national
nationalbuilding
buildingstock
stockso
sothis
thisanalysis
analysismay
mayprovide
provide
indications
potential
in the
indications
onon
thethe
potential
of
of
deep
retrofitted
buildings
for
sufficiency,
efficiency,
flexibility
and
coverage
of
energy
deep retrofitted buildings for sufficiency, efficiency, flexibility and coverage of
needs via on-site renewables.
The complex
complexisismade
madeofoftwo
twobuildings,
buildings,
named
Building
1 and
2 (Figure
4). They
The
named
Building
1 and
2 (Figure
4). They
pre2
2
present
a gross
surface
equal
to respectively
1797
2836
, accounting
sent
a gross
surface
areaarea
equal
to respectively
1797
m2 m
andand
2836
m2,maccounting
for for
66
66 residential
units
estimated
population
of 210
persons.
residential
units
andand
an an
estimated
population
of 210
persons.

Energies 2021, 14, 4697
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW

16 of 32
17 of 35

Figure4.4.Aerial
Aerialview
viewand
andgeometrical
geometricalmodel
modelof
ofthe
thepublic
publichousing
housingestate.
estate.
Figure

The building
building envelope
envelope isis made
made of
ofprefabricated
prefabricatedconcrete
concreteelements
elementsand
andpresents
presentsaa
The
window/wall
ratio
of
14%.
The
pre-retrofit
state
included
thin
layers
of
thermal
insulation
window/wall ratio of 14%. The pre-retrofit state included thin layers of thermal insulation
material only
only in
insome
someareas,
areas,and
andpresented
presentedlow
lowperformance
performancewindows
windowswith
withno
noproper
proper
material
solarshading
shading(only
(onlyroller
rollershutters
shuttersthat
thatwhen
whenoperated
operatedblocked
blockedcompletely
completelyboth
bothdaylight
daylight
solar
andventilation).
ventilation).The
Thecentralized
centralized
heating
system
used
oilthe
as energy
the energy
carrier
(η =
and
heating
system
used
fuelfuel
oil as
carrier
(η = 0.7),
whereas
each apartment
was equipped
with awith
locala boiler
for DHW
generation
(η = 0.7),
0.7), whereas
each apartment
was equipped
local boiler
for DHW
generation
(η =
using
natural
gas asgas
the as
energy
carrier.carrier.
Natural
gas was
used
foralso
cooking,
while allwhile
the
0.7), using
natural
the energy
Natural
gas
wasalso
used
for cooking,
other
uses relied
electrical
energy, energy,
suppliedsupplied
by the national
grid. grid.
all theenergy
other energy
useson
relied
on electrical
by the national
The
retrofit
aimed
at
improving
first
of
all
the
energy
performance
The retrofit aimed at improving first of all the energy performanceofofthe
thebuilding
building
envelope:
envelope:substantial
substantialexterior
exteriorinsulation
insulationof
ofthe
theopaque
opaqueelements
elementsincluding
includingwalls,
walls,roof
roofand
and
exposed
exposedground
groundfloor
floorslab,
slab,extremely
extremelydetailed
detailedreduction
reductionofofthermal
thermalbridges,
bridges,low-e
low-edouble
double
pane glazing and window frames with thermal break and exterior solar blinds (Figure 5).
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW pane glazing and window frames with thermal break and exterior solar blinds (Figure
18 of 355).
Table
3
shows
the
physical
characteristics
of
the
building
fabric,
before
and
after
Table 3 shows the physical characteristics of the building fabric, before and afterthe
thedeep
deep
energy
retrofit.
energy retrofit.
After the envelope renovation design, the project focused on improvements of the
building systems, as follows:
-

-

-

Installation of a centralized generation system for heating and DHW based on waterto-water heat pump technology (92 kW and a seasonal coefficient of performance
(SCOP) of 2.7 according to standard EN 14825 [124]);
Installation of thermostatic valves on each radiator;
Installation of a centralized mechanical ventilation system with heat recovery and
bypass (to allow for free cooling in summer and mid seasons) and an average specific
fan power of 2 kW/(m3/s);
Installation of LED lamps for common area lighting.

Figure
Window-wall
detail
after
the
deep
energyretrofit:
retrofit:the
thenew
newwindows,
windows,characterized
characterized
Figure
5. 5.Window-wall
detail
after
the
deep
energy
byby
highly
insulating
glass
and
frame,
are
protected
by
movable
solar
blinds
and
mosquito
nets,
which
highly insulating glass and frame, are protected by movable solar blinds and mosquito nets, which
create
a barrier
insects
with
a small
reduction
the
flowwhen
whennatural
naturalventilation
ventilationisisused.
used.
create
a barrier
forfor
insects
with
a small
reduction
ofof
the
airair
flow

Table 3. Physical characteristics of the building, before and after the renovation.

Thermal transmittance of opaque vertical
structures U (W/(m2K))
Thermal transmittance of the ceiling under
the uninhabitable attic U (W/(m2K))

Before
Renovation

After Renovation

1.15

0.13

3.00

0.15

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

17 of 32

Table 3. Physical characteristics of the building, before and after the renovation.

Thermal transmittance of opaque vertical
structures U (W/(m2 K))
Thermal transmittance of the ceiling under the
uninhabitable attic U (W/(m2 K))
Thermal transmittance of the pilotis supported
slab U (W/(m2 K))
Thermal transmittance of glass panes U
(W/(m2 K))
Thermal transmittance of the window frames U
(W/(m2 K))
Total solar transmittance of glass panes (%)

Before Renovation

After Renovation

1.15

0.13

3.00

0.15

2.40

0.17

3.00

1.42

5.00

1.60

0.75

0.52

After the envelope renovation design, the project focused on improvements of the
building systems, as follows:
-

-

-

Installation of a centralized generation system for heating and DHW based on waterto-water heat pump technology (92 kW and a seasonal coefficient of performance
(SCOP) of 2.7 according to standard EN 14825 [124]);
Installation of thermostatic valves on each radiator;
Installation of a centralized mechanical ventilation system with heat recovery and
bypass (to allow for free cooling in summer and mid seasons) and an average specific
fan power of 2 kW/(m3 /s);
Installation of LED lamps for common area lighting.

Finally, according to the climatic conditions and to the available roof surface, a PV
system for the exploitation of renewable energy sources was designed and installed.
The analysis of the building behavior was performed through the energy model
that was developed in an EnergyPlus (Illinois–CA, USA) simulation environment with
a high number of thermal zones, in order to be able to assess the behavior of the individual apartments including the effect of the orientation. The geometric modeling was
realized on the basis of laser scanning topographic surveys, validated and corrected by
on-site inspections and verifications. The model considers the presence of thermal bridges,
characterized by the calculated linear thermal transmittance value before and after the
retrofit. Building 1 was subdivided into 41 thermal zones and Building 2 in 66 thermal
zones. In particular, twenty-two of the twenty-four apartments of Building 1 were modeled as individual thermal zones; the remaining two apartments, which accommodated
an advanced indoor environmental monitoring equipment for assessing indoor comfort
conditions, were modeled considering a thermal zone for each single room (for a total of
about seven thermal zones per apartment). Finally, six thermal zones were dedicated to
unheated environments: staircases, basement and attic floor. In Building 2, thirty-nine of
the forty-two apartments were modeled as individual thermal zones; the remaining three
were modeled considering a thermal zone for each single room (for about seven thermal
zones per apartment), whereas eight thermal zones were used for unheated environments.
For the calculation of the energy needs, the heating system was characterized in EnergyPlus by an ideal system able to maintain a temperature of 20 ◦ C during the heating
season that is defined according to Italian national regulations from 15 October to 14 April,
for the considered climatic zone. During the cooling season, from 15 April to 14 October, an ideal active cooling system able to maintain an indoor set-point temperature of
26 ◦ C was simulated. The mechanical ventilation system was modeled considering 0.5 air
changes per hour (ACH) with night attenuation (22:00–6:00) equal to 0.25 ACH. In the
pre-retrofit model, an air infiltration value of 0.5 ACH was set for the apartments and
staircase units, whereas it was set equal to 1 ACH for unheated areas. In the post-retrofit
model, air infiltration was reduced to 0.05 ACH in the apartments and to 0.5 ACH for
staircases. After a sensitivity analysis, it was decided to activate the shading devices in

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

18 of 32

the post-retrofit whenever the solar irradiance level exceeded 200 W/m2 , simulating an
“average” occupant behavior. In the pre-retrofit model, no shading device was considered;
only rolling shutters were applied at night-time. To simulate the presence of people and
therefore to improve the estimation of internal gains, a schedule based on measured electric
consumption was created (the input values were used after a careful analysis on the quality
of existing electrical energy data). Further analyses based on data-driven procedures were
performed to derive even more detailed occupancy and occupant-related load profiles and
are presented in [125].
5.2. Assessing Energy Efficiency Improvements
The effectiveness of the renovation actions was evaluated calculating the energy needs for
heating and cooling per net conditioned floor area before and after the deep energy retrofit.
The simulations were performed considering as the yearly outdoor weather dataset the
typical meteorological year (TMY) file of the location, obtained through the TMY tool
developed and updated by the Joint Research Centre of the European Commission.
The weather dataset was characterized by 2593 heating degree days (HDD) and by
69 cooling degree days (CDD), calculated according to ISO 15927-6:2007 [126]. Figures 6–8
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW
show respectively the hourly outdoor air temperature, the monthly global horizontal solar
irradiation and the frequency distribution of wind speed and direction in Chiaravalle, Milan.

2

Figure
6. Hourly
outdoor air
temperature
distribution
in Chiaravalle,
Milan
(latitude:
Figure 6. Hourly
outdoor
air temperature
distribution
in Chiaravalle,
Milan
(latitude: 45.417,
longitude:
9.214,45.417,
height: 105 m).
longitude: 9.214, height: 105 m).

The outputs of the dynamic simulations show, as a result of the deep retrofit, a
reduction of the yearly energy need for heating from 147.4 to 16.6 kWh/m2 net and of the
yearly energy need for cooling from 19.6 to 9.1 kWh/m2 net . In summer, the application
of natural night ventilation and the use of ceiling fans for achieving comfort at higher
air temperature was expected to further significantly reduce the energy needs for cooling.
Conservatively we assumed a remaining level of energy need for cooling at 7 kWh/m2 y.

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

19 of 32

Figure 6. Hourly outdoor air temperature distribution in Chiaravalle, Milan (latitude: 45.417, longitude: 9.214, height: 105 m).

Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW

21 of 35

Figure 7.
7. Monthly
Monthlyglobal
globalhorizontal
horizontalsolar
solarirradiation
irradiation
Chiaravalle,
Milan
(latitude:
45.417,
longitude:
9.214,
height:
105
Figure
in in
Chiaravalle,
Milan
(latitude:
45.417,
longitude:
9.214,
height:
105 m).
m).

Figure 8. Frequency distribution of wind speed and direction during the year in Chiaravalle, Milan
(latitude: 45.417, longitude: 9.214, height: 105 m).
Figure 8. Frequency distribution of wind speed and direction during the year in Chiaravalle, Milan (latitude: 45.417, lonthe Energy Flexibility Potential after the Renovation
gitude: 9.214, height:5.3.
105Assessing
m).

To evaluate the storage potential of the thermal mass during winter [127], after the
renovation,
in our simulations
broughtPotential
the conditioned
space to an operative tempera5.3. Assessing
the Energywe
Flexibility
after the Renovation
◦ C. This temperature corresponds to the upper value of the comfort range of
ture of 24.1 To
evaluate the storage potential of the thermal mass during winter [127], after the
renovation, in our simulations we brought the conditioned space to an operative temperature of 24.1 °C. This temperature corresponds to the upper value of the comfort range of
category II using the Fanger PMV model, when assuming typical indoor winter clothing
(1 clo), metabolic activity corresponding to office work (1.2 met), low air velocity (0.1 m/s)

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

20 of 32

category II using the Fanger PMV model, when assuming typical indoor winter clothing
(1 clo), metabolic activity corresponding to office work (1.2 met), low air velocity (0.1 m/s)
and relative humidity (40%) [75].
This temperature was maintained in the simulation for respectively 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 days.
Afterwards
the heating system was turned off. In order to eliminate climate variability
from
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW
22 of 35
thermal
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEWthe calculation and focus the analysis on the effect of the thermal capacity plus22
of 35
insulation in delivering flexibility, we selected an “average winter day” (Figures 9 and 10),
which during a set of simulations was cyclically repeated.

Figure
9. 9.
Outdoor
airair
temperature
during
anan
“average
winter
day”.
Figure
Outdoor
temperature
during
“average
winter
day”.
Figure 9. Outdoor air temperature during an “average winter day”.

Figure 10. Hourly global horizontal irradiation during an “average winter day”.

Figure 10. Hourly global horizontal irradiation during an “average winter day”.
◦
TheHourly
time interval
during which
the space
remained
in the
comfort
Figure 10.
global horizontal
irradiation
during
an “average
winter
day”.zone (24.1–19.5 C),

under
climate
givenduring
by the cyclic
an “average
winter
day”,zone
was different
for
Theatime
interval
whichrepetition
the spaceofremained
in the
comfort
(24.1–19.5
each
of
the
five
cases,
but
the
difference
was
limited.
By
heating
up
(within
the
comfort
The time
interval
during
which
the
space remained
in the comfort
zonewas
(24.1–19.5
°C), under
a climate
given
by the
cyclic
repetition
of an “average
winter day”,
differzone)
the
envelope
for
1
day,
the
conditioned
space
will
remain
in
the
comfort
zone
after
°C),
under
a
climate
given
by
the
cyclic
repetition
of
an
“average
winter
day”,
was
different for each of the five cases, but the difference was limited. By heating up (within the
turning
off
the
heating
system
for
approximately
4
days
(96
h,
as
shown
in
Figure
11).
ent
for each
of the
the envelope
five cases,forbut
the difference
was limited.
By heating
(within
theBy
comfort
zone)
1 day,
the conditioned
space will
remain up
in the
comfort

comfort
zone)
the envelope
for 1 day,
the conditioned
space will
remain
in as
theshown
comfort
zone after
turning
off the heating
system
for approximately
4 days
(96 h,
in
zone
off up
thethe
heating
system
approximately
4 days
(96 remained
h, as shown
in
Figureafter
11). turning
By heating
envelope
for 2for
days,
the conditioned
space
in the
Figure
Byafter
heating
up the
envelope
days,than
the 5conditioned
remained
in the
comfort11).
zone
turning
off the
heatingfor
for2more
days (more space
than 120
h, as shown
in
comfort
zone
after
turning
off
the
heating
for
more
than
5
days
(more
than
120
h,
as
shown
in
Figure 11). A further increase in the time interval during which the heating was kept on

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

21 of 32

heating up the envelope for 2 days, the conditioned space remained in the comfort zone
after turning off the heating for more than 5 days (more than 120 h, as shown in Figure 11).
A
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEWfurther increase in the time interval during which the heating was kept on produced
23 of 35
marginal results showing that it was possible to activate a large part of the thermal storage
potential by keeping the heating system turned on for just one day.

Figure 11. Variation over time of operative temperature in a reference indoor heated space as a
Figure 11. Variation over time of operative temperature in a reference indoor heated space as a
function
function of
of the
the number
number of
of days
days (1–5)
(1–5) during
during which
which the
the heating
heating system
system was
was kept
kept on
on(before
(beforebeing
being
turned
turned off),
off), with
with external
external conditions
conditionsgiven
givenby
bythe
thecyclic
cyclicrepetition
repetitionof
ofan
an“average
“averagewinter
winterday”.
day”.

The
The hypothesis
hypothesis underlying
underlyingthe
the study
study is
is that
that the
the increased
increased external
external thermal
thermal insulation
insulation
of
walls,
roofs
and
basements,
and
the
heat
recovery
on
ventilation,
considerably
of walls, roofs and basements, and the heat recovery on ventilation, considerablyextends
extends
the
time
interval
during
which
a
building
will
maintain
indoor
conditions
in
the
comfort
the time interval during which a building will maintain indoor conditions in the comfort
range.
range. This
This fact
fact will
will make
make itit possible
possible to:
to: (i)
(i) coordinate
coordinate the
the demand
demand with
with the
the supply
supplyof
oflocal
local
energy, by removing the current rigidity of energy demand from buildings and thus allow
energy, by removing the current rigidity of energy demand from buildings and thus allow
them to “ask for” energy precisely when it is available from local sources (renewable or
them to “ask for” energy precisely when it is available from local sources (renewable or
recovered energy) or to exchange energy with other buildings in a flexible way; (ii) exploit
recovered energy) or to exchange energy with other buildings in a flexible way; (ii) exploit
moments of supply overabundance of renewable energy on the grid by making available
moments of supply overabundance of renewable energy on the grid by making available
energy storage capabilities (in the form of thermal capacity of the building fabric) when
energy storage capabilities (in the form of thermal capacity of the building fabric) when
such moments occur; (iii) manage conditions of energy supply shortage by attenuating
such moments occur; (iii) manage conditions of energy supply shortage by attenuating
the peak power demand on the grid or district heating network (peak shaving, demand
the peak power demand on the grid or district heating network (peak shaving, demand
response, potential participation in the capacity market creating added value that is in
response, potential participation in the capacity market creating added value that is in
addition to the value associated with energy savings and increased comfort).
addition to the value associated with energy savings and increased comfort).
In the case of a series of adverse days (night temperature dropping to −7 ◦ C and
In thehourly
case of irradiation
a series of adverse
(night
temperature
to −7 °Cinand
max2 ), the timedropping
maximum
reduceddays
to 100
Wh/m
of permanence
comfort
2), the time of permanence in comfort after
imum
hourly
irradiation
reduced
to
100
Wh/m
after one day of “thermal charge” reduced slightly, to 70 h, e.g., about 3 days.
one day
of “thermal
reduced slightly,
to 70 h,and
e.g.,doors
aboutwas
3 days.
Figure
12 shows charge”
that the substitution
of windows
not, by itself, enough
Figure
12
shows
that
the
substitution
of
windows
and
doors
was not, by itself,
to significantly modify the thermal dynamics of a building with a window/wall
ratio
enough
to
significantly
modify
the
thermal
dynamics
of
a
building
with
a
window/wall
typical of existing residential buildings in Italy. Thermal insulation of the opaque parts of
ratio
typicalfabric
of existing
residential
buildings
in Italy.
Thermal insulation
the opaque
the
building
to the level
of quality
taken under
consideration
in this caseof
(conductivity
parts
of
the
building
fabric
to
the
level
of
quality
taken
under
consideration
in this was
case
in the order of 0.035–0.040 W/(m·K) and a 25 cm thickness of external insulation)
(conductivity
in
the
order
of
0.035–0.040
W/(m·K)
and
a
25
cm
thickness
of
external
insuindispensable for obtaining building flexibility (in addition to saving energy by reducing
lation)
was
indispensable
obtaining
building
to saving energy
the
energy
need
for heating). for
Obviously,
limiting
the flexibility
renovation(in
to addition
just the substitution
of the
by reducing
thegeneration
energy needsystem,
for heating).
Obviously,
limiting the
renovation
just the
subthermal
energy
without
any intervention
on the
buildingtofabric,
would
stitution
of theon
thermal
energy generation system, without any intervention on the buildhave
no effect
the flexibility.
ing fabric, would have no effect on the flexibility.

rgies 2021, Energies
14, x FOR
PEER
2021,
14,REVIEW
4697

24 of 35

22 of 32

Figure 12. Variation
over
of theover
operative
temperature
in atemperature
reference heated
space as aheated
function
of the
measures
Figure
12.time
Variation
time of
the operative
in a reference
space
as aretrofit
function
undertaken, after
tworetrofit
days during
which
the heating
system
was kept
onwhich
(beforethe
being
turned
off) and
of the
measures
undertaken,
after
two days
during
heating
system
was with
kept the
on cyclic
repetition of an(before
“average
winter
day”.
being
turned
off) and with the cyclic repetition of an “average winter day”.

thebefore
situation
before renovation
of thefabric,
building
even delivering
ConsideringConsidering
the situation
renovation
of the building
evenfabric,
delivering
◦ C, once the heating system was turned
heat
for
one
day
with
a
set-point
temperature
of
24
heat for one day with a set-point temperature of 24 °C, once the heating system was turned
off the
building
will only
remain
in the
comfort
rangeten
forhours.
about The
ten hours.
The
off the building
will
only remain
in the
comfort
range
for about
effect of
a effect of a
potential
shift
of
the
demand
was
limited
and
very
costly
in
terms
of
energy
dissipation.
In
potential shift of the demand was limited and very costly in terms of energy dissipation.
fact,
most
existing
buildings
behaved
like
short-circuited
(thermal)
batteries.
In fact, most existing buildings behaved like short-circuited (thermal) batteries.
Thermalof
insulation
of the
building
fabric,
possibly
with the
of a mechanical
Thermal insulation
the building
fabric,
possibly
with
the addition
of addition
a mechanical
ventilation
system
with
heat
recovery,
proves
to
be
an
indispensable
condition
to enable the
ventilation system with heat recovery, proves to be an indispensable condition to enable
to be flexible
with respect
the moment
time when
energy
is required. Most
the buildingbuilding
to be flexible
with respect
to the to
moment
in timeinwhen
energy
is required.
of
the
current
buildings
were
“rigid”
in
this
respect
and
in
winter
they
all
needed energy
Most of the current buildings were “rigid” in this respect and in winter they all needed
in the same morning time slot after the reduction of the set-point temperature at night.
energy in the same morning time slot after the reduction of the set-point temperature at
night.
“Storage of Coolness” in the Thermal Mass
The achieved
“physical”
flexibility will be exploited with the support of the H2020
“Storage of Coolness”
in the Thermal
Mass
project SATO. Energy use and state of various systems (heat pumps, mechanical ventilation
The achieved
flexibility
be exploited
the support
of theapartments
H2020
and PV “physical”
panels on the
roof) andwill
indoor
conditionwith
of some
representative
will be
project SATO.
Energy
use
and
state
of
various
systems
(heat
pumps,
mechanical
ventilacontinuously monitored and the optimization procedure will provide instructions to the
tion and PVbuilding
panels on
the roof)
indoor on
condition
some
representative
apartments
manager
andand
occupants
how to of
take
profit
of the local availability
of renewable
will be continuously
monitored
and
the
optimization
procedure
will
provide
instructions
energy in order to “thermally charge” the structures and avoid energy use at times of
to the building
and occupants
on energy,
how to taking
take profit
the local
availability
of forecasted
low manager
or zero availability
of RES
into of
account
also
current and
renewable energy
order to “thermally
charge”
the structures
andwill
avoid
energy
use
at
weatherinconditions.
This “Building
as Battery”
concept
allow
one to
combine
in the
times of lowbest
or zero
availabilityflexibility
of RES energy,
takingand
intooptimization,
account alsowhere
current
fore-cost will be
way “physical”
and control
theand
storage
casted weather conditions. This “Building as Battery” concept will allow one to combine

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

23 of 32

essentially zero since the insulation that avoids the “batteries” to quickly discharge into
the environment is paid back already and in a short time via the energy savings.
5.4. Enabling Energy Sufficiency Actions
As we discussed in previous sections, sufficiency actions could be hindered or enabled
by physical and regulatory infrastructures. In the case of the considered Chiaravalle
buildings a number of enabling features are already installed, others are in the phase of
evaluation and planning.
5.4.1. Enablers Already Approved/Installed
The relatively ample balconies will enjoy external movable shading devices and
external movable insect screens (Figure 5); this creates an external area where to spend
time in the evening in the summer and mid seasons and allows for night ventilation,
complementing the fact that almost all apartments have openings in opposite facades
of the building, hence allowing for cross ventilation and heat flushing of the thermal
mass. The thick external insulation contributes to greatly smoothing and delaying the
heat wave crossing the walls and ceiling, hence reducing mean radiant temperature of
the rooms, in cooperation with external solar protections at each opening and cross night
ventilation. Some of the occupants spontaneously reported their appreciation for the
substantial reduction of the temperature of the indoor surfaces in summer compared to the
pre-retrofit situation.
These improvements in comfort by passive means might enable occupants to adopt
sufficiency behaviors such as moving to the fresher part of the space, adapting clothing,
and avoiding the installation/use of air conditioning units.
5.4.2. Enablers under Analysis/Planning
-

-

-

Offering support to families for the choice and installation of efficient ceiling fans,
which would allow it to deliver at 28–29 ◦ C, the same summer comfort level as at
25–26 ◦ C according to a large number of experiments and surveys in many world
locations and consolidated in the new version of comfort standards (EN 16798 and
ASHRAE 55).
Installation of a water tap on the balconies for easing the installation and use of simple
sprinkles to add evaporative cooling in extreme days.
Offering support (or direct installation) of low flow shower heads and heat recovery
on drainage water.
National funding is available for the above improvements (both for devices and
installation cost) up to 65% via tax rebates.
Installation of well designed, comfortable to use devices for line drying outdoor, as is
traditional in many parts of Italy.
Creation of shelters for bikes, cargo bikes and strollers in some of the rooms on the
ground floor.
Creation of a bike path, separated from the road, along the path of a disabled train
line, to connect the Chiaravalle district to the public transit hub of Rogoredo (where
it is possible to take long distance trains, urban trains and metro, buses; the Duomo,
center of the city, can be joined from Rogoredo in 12 min by metro).
Reduction of the velocity limit to 20 km/h in the whole district and the availability of
alternatives to private cars (shared electric/cargo bikes and trolleys and an automated
small bus taking profit of the abandoned rail connecting Chiaravalle to Rogoredo to
allow more flexible rides in addition to the present bus line).

The whole measures for enabling a significant modal shift from private cars to biking
and public transit is supposed to reduce the use of a private car from 12,000 to 5000 km per
household. In both scenarios it is assumed that a small electric car per family was used,
with a performance of 18.6 kWh per 100 km [128].

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

24 of 32

5.5. Yearly and Seasonal Energy Balance of the District
Based on the data from the literature and our own analyses described in the previous
sections of the paper, we drew an energy balance of a representative unit footprint (1 m2 )
of the buildings, in terms of orders of magnitude. The analysis reported in Table 4 was
performed for the entire year and for “winter” (October to March) and “summer” (April
to September). We assumed an average height of the building of four stories, which is
representative of the district. A number of input data were taken from national statistics,
such as average electric energy use/household, flat average size, in order to be able to
generalize the result to other situations. Sources of data are indicated in the table; specific
calculations performed by the authors are briefly described in the notes and were based
on the energy efficiency and sufficiency options analyzed in the previous sections. The
objective was to identify the key areas and to draw general conclusions on the feasibility
of a net (or positive) energy balance and the land take impact of this objective in the
two scenarios:
(A) In which no action was taken to reduce the energy needs and only supply was improved, by installing a heat pump for heating/cooling and DHW and PV on the
rooftop (consistency of supply);
(B) In which energy needs were reduced by sufficiency and efficiency measures and supply
was improved by installing a heat pump and PV on the rooftop and part of the facades
(sufficiency, efficiency and consistency of supply).
Table 4. Overall energy balance over a year, “winter” and “summer”.
Scenario A (Only Consistency of Supply)

Apartment
average floor area

SI Units

Scenario A
(Whole
Year)

Ref.

m2

105.9
2.7

Energy uses

Energy needs

Reference building

SEER, SCOP
3

Scenario B (Sufficiency, Efficiency and Consistency of
Supply)
Scenario B
(Whole
Year)

Ref

[129]

105.9

[129]

[124]

2.7

[124]

Scenario A
(“Winter”)

Scenario A
(“Summer”)

2

Scenario B
(“Winter”)

Ventilated volume

m /m

2.7

(a)

Air changes/h

vol/h

0.5

(b)

Air volume flow
rate

m3 /s

0.00038

*

SFP

kW/(m3 /s)

2

(c)

Mechanical power
for ventilation

kW/m2

0.00083

*

Average number
of hours of
ventilation (15/10
to 15/04)

h

Not active

4320

(d)

Energy need for heating

kWhthermal /
m2 /y

147.4

(e) [16]

16.6

(e)

Energy need for hot water

kWhthermal /
m2 /y

20.0

[16,130]

12.0

(f)

Energy need for cooling

kWhthermal /
m2 /y

19.6

(e)

7.0

(e, f)

6.1

*

6.1

3.3

4.4

*

2.4

7.3

2.6

*

1800

[132]

17.0

*

Energy use for
heating

kWhelectric /m2 /y

54.6

*

54.6

Energy use for hot
water

kWhelectric /m2 /y

7.4

*

4.1

Energy use for
cooling

kWhelectric /m2 /y

7.3

*

2870

[131]

27.1

*

Average electricity
use in apartments
(for appliances,
lighting, ICT, etc.)
Electricity use in
apartments (for
appliances,
lighting, ICT, etc.)

kWhelectric /y

kWhelectric /m2 /y

15.1

12.0

Scenario B
(“Summer”)

2.0
2.6

9.5

7.5

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

25 of 32

Table 4. Cont.
Scenario B (Sufficiency, Efficiency and Consistency of
Supply)

Scenario A (Only Consistency of Supply)

SI Units

Scenario A
(Whole
Year)

Ref.

Scenario A
(“Winter”)

Scenario A
(“Summer”)

Scenario B
(Whole
Year)

Ref

Scenario B
(“Winter”)

Scenario B
(“Summer”)

[133,134]

2.3

1.6

3.3

[133,134]

2.0

1.3

0

0.2

[105]

Energy use for
cooking

kWhelectric /m2 /y

3.9

Energy use by
ceiling fans

kWhelectric /m2 /y

Not
installed

Energy use by
elevators

kWhelectric /m2 /y

3.0

[135]

1.5

1.5

1.8

[135]

0.9

0.9

Energy use for
lighting in
common areas

kWhelectric /m2 /y

1.2

[136]

0.7

0.5

0.6

[136]

0.4

0.2

Energy use for
mechanical
ventilation

kWhelectric /m2 /y

Not
installed

0

0

3.6

*

3.6

0

0.2

km

11,885

[137]

5000

(f)

Energy use per
distance traveled
of a small sized
electric car

kWhelectric /km

0.186

[128]

0.186

[128]

Total use with
private vehicle

kWhelectric /m2 /y

20.9

*

12.2

8.7

8.8

*

5.1

3.7

Public transport
use

kWhelectric /m2 /y

2.0

[138]

1.0

1.0

5.0

[138]

2.5

2.5

Total energy use
(delivered energy) per
unit conditioned floor
area

kWhelectric /m2 /y

127.3

*

91.6

35.8

53.5

*

32.6

20.9

4

(c)

4

(c)

Mobility

Space travelled
with electric
private vehicle/household

Average number
of stories
kWhelectric /m2 /y

509.4

*

366.2

143.2

214.0

*

130.3

83.7

Generation by PV
on roof per unit
footprint area of
the building

kWhelectric /m2 /y

120.0

(g)

39.0

81.0

120.0

(g)

39.0

81.0

Generation by PV
on facades per
unit footprint area
of the building

kWhelectric /m2 /y

Not
installed

0

0

95.0

[139]

30.9

64.1

kWhelectric /m2 /y

−389.4

*

−327.2

−62.2

1.0

*

−60.4

61.5

−3.2

*

−8.4

−0.8

0

*

−1.5

0

RES

Total energy use
(delivered energy) per
unit footprint area of
the building

Overall energy
balance
Land take necessary to
achieve a zero energy
balance

m2

land /

m2

footprint

(a)—An average height equal to 2.7 m is considered. (b)—Air change per hour defined according to the Italian standard. (c)—Values
according to the technical documentation of the project, see Section 5.1. (d)—The number of hours during which the mechanical ventilation
is active is calculated considering full utilization (24/7) during the heating season (from 15/10 to 14/04 in the climatic zone E). (e)—The
values of energy needs have been estimated through the dynamic energy simulations realized for the case study (see Section 5.2). (f)—The
values reported take into account energy sufficiency actions described in Section 4.1 and 5.4. (g)—These values were calculated via
PVGIS simulations assuming: solar radiation database PVGIS-SARAH; PV technology crystalline silicon; installed peak PV power of
0.205 kWp/m2 ; system loss of 14%; slope of 35◦ ; azimuth of +45◦ and −45◦ . For each m2 of footprint 0.5 m2 of PV panels can be installed,
taking into account the geometry of the roof and the orientation of the building. * All these values were calculated using the values shown
in the text, defined on the base of literature or simulations (see letters a–g).

6. Discussion
The challenge of defining and realizing positive energy districts is made complex by
various factors, in particular if the balance is performed over the entire year rather than
on smaller time intervals. For example, if one assumes the aim of a net yearly zero (or

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

26 of 32

positive) energy balance between exports to and imports from the grid, using any energy
storage creates a penalty by increasing energy use, due to unavoidable energy losses of the
storage. Hence a conflict arises with the objective of maximizing the self-use of on-site
generated renewable energy at the time when it is available, that is with the objective of
being “flexible” about the time when the district uses energy, either for direct services or
for storage and delayed use.
Both at the district and building level, another general critique holds with respect
to an energy balance performed over a year when compensation is allowed between
different time steps: it allows one to compensate for continued fossil use in some moments
(e.g., winter) with overproduction of RES at other times (e.g., summer). This obviously
does not lead to zero emissions and/or requires large interseasonal storage locally or
somewhere in the network, with associated land occupation, energy losses and use of
materials, embedded energy and related costs.
In the case of buildings, some MS, such as Italy and Spain, have chosen in their Energy
Performance Certificate to perform the balance with only partial compensation, meaning
that compensation happens within months but not between different months. Additionally,
in the future even lower time periods for compensation might be chosen in case more
detailed calculation methods would be adopted for the energy certification (e.g., when
hourly calculation methods would be adopted), rather than the most current calculation
method, based on monthly average weather data. A similar accounting method to limit the
negative effects of the simplistic yearly balance should be adopted also when performing
the energy balance of a district.
An additional difficulty arises due to urban density when comparing the load with
the available solar production per unit area of the buildings footprint. To show the order
of magnitude of the mismatch we performed the assessment presented in Section 5.5. We
performed the energy balance at a yearly level and further detailed it into the “winter
semester” (October to March) and “summer semester” (April to September) in the two
scenarios:
(A) In which no action was taken to reduce the energy needs and only supply was improved, by installing a heat pump for heating/cooling and DHW and PV on the
rooftop (consistency of supply);
(B) In which energy needs were reduced by sufficiency and efficiency measures and supply
was improved by installing a heat pump and PV on the rooftop and part of the facades
(sufficiency, efficiency and consistency of supply).
Aiming at a yearly net zero energy balance in scenario A, the energy use was so high
that, in order to generate energy with additional PV installed on the ground, it would be
necessary to take a land approximately 3.2 times larger than the footprint of the buildings,
e.g., by subtracting that land to the adjacent park. However, obviously the balance was
made over one year, so this accounting was virtual rather than physical. Even adding a
PV plant 3.2 times larger than the district would only bring to zero the “paper” yearly
accounting. In physical terms there will be an overproduction in summer and a portion of
uses in winter not covered by the PV generation. Hence the buildings would still rely on
fossil fuels and continue to generate emissions.
By performing an analysis where the aim is to achieve a zero energy balance per
semester (“winter” and summer”), which is making the “paper” balance just a bit closer
to physical reality, the land required in scenario A to achieve zero balance in winter was
8.4 times larger than the footprint of the buildings, assuming that no interseasonal storage
was available. Achieving a zero energy balance month by month would require even
more land.
In scenario B, where sufficiency and efficiency allowed for a significant reduction of
energy needs and uses, the addition of a reasonable amount of PV on facades would allow
one to obtain on paper a yearly zero energy balance and avoid any additional land use.
Obviously, when performing the balance per semester the result was different. A zero
energy balance in winter still required additional surface for installation of PV, but this time

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

27 of 32

the surface was 1.5 times the footprint of the buildings and one could imagine to find this
surface, e.g., via structures suspended over the parking lots serving the Abbazia, a fraction
of the area of the water treatment plant, portions of the adjacent provincial road and train
rails in such a way to avoid the need to take land from the surrounding agricultural and
park area.
Even in this case obviously there would remain additional penalties for the losses due
to daily and seasonal mismatch of generation and use. However, the scale of the challenge
and of the use of material and land was reduced by a factor of about 6. In fact the situation
in case A would be even more unfavorable, since demand in that scenario was highly
inflexible, hence in the physical reality the generated PV will only partially be used onsite
due to mismatch between the time of supply and time of demand. In case B the flexibility
of demand will be much higher and a better match between generation and demand will be
possible. Taking into account the negative effect of inflexibility, scenario A would probably
need a land take of at least an order of magnitude higher than scenario B.
In conclusion the problem of land requirement might be greatly reduced when applying efficiency and sufficiency measures, which would drastically reduce energy needs and
increase flexibility.
Similarly for meeting the challenge to provide storage at various time scales, from
the daily to the interseasonal, a strong reduction of energy needs for heating and cooling via
efficiency techniques and physical and regulatory frameworks that enable low-energy
lifestyles (sufficiency) might prove decisive since this would reduce the size of required
storage and the connected embedded energy and energy losses.
Further research work is required to explore in more detail the potential offered by
the combination of a) increased flexibility in demand offered by improvements of the
building fabric and heat recovery on ventilation and b) controls that optimize the use of
this flexibility based on forecasts of weather, use conditions and renewable generation,
e.g., in the following days up to one week. The authors plan to contribute to this further
analysis within the ongoing H2020 SATO project.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.E. and L.P.; methodology, S.E. and L.P.; software, S.E.;
formal analysis, S.E. and L.P.; writing—original draft preparation, S.E. and L.P.; writing—review and
editing, S.E. and L.P.; visualization, S.E.; funding acquisition, S.E. and L.P. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The study was partly developed within the framework of the project SATO (Self Assessment
Towards Optimization of Building Energy), which has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 957128. This study
will also contribute to the project FULFILL (Fundamental Decarbonisation Through Sufficiency By
Lifestyle Changes), which has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme under grant agreement No 101003656, as per the potential role of
sufficiency.
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge help in data collection and useful discussions with Arch. S.
Bardeschi and F. Manzoni of Municipality of Milano, A. Roscetti and A. Barbieri from eERG-Polimi
and stimulating discussions within EERA (European Energy Research Alliance).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.

2.
3.
4.

United Nations. Resolution Adopted by the General Assembly on 25 September 2015-Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. Available online: https://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E
(accessed on 3 July 2021).
Grubler, A.; Bai, X.; Buettner, T.; Dhakal, S.; Fisk, D.J.; Ichinose, T.; Keirstead, J.E.; Sammer, G.; Satterthwaite, D.; Schulz, N.B.; et al.
Urban Energy Systems. In Global Energy Assessment (GEA); Cambridge University Press (CUP): Cambridge, UK, 2012; pp. 1307–1400.
Schraven, D.; Joss, S.; de Jong, M. Past, present, future: Engagement with sustainable urban development through 35 city labels
in the scientific literature 1990–2019. J. Clean. Prod. 2021, 292, 125924. [CrossRef]
Moreno, C.; Allam, Z.; Chabaud, D.; Gall, C.; Pratlong, F. Introducing the “15-Minute City”: Sustainability, Resilience and Place
Identity in Future Post-Pandemic Cities. Smart Cities 2021, 4, 93–111. [CrossRef]

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.

28 of 32

Yeung, P. How “15-Minute Cities” Will Change the Way We Socialise. Available online: https://www.bbc.com/worklife/article/
20201214-how-15-minute-cities-will-change-the-way-we-socialise (accessed on 30 July 2021).
Maestosi, P.C.; Andreucci, M.B.; Civiero, P. Sustainable Urban Areas for 2030 in a Post-COVID-19 Scenario: Focus on Innovative
Research and Funding Frameworks to Boost Transition towards 100 Positive Energy Districts and 100 Climate-Neutral Cities.
Energies 2021, 14, 216. [CrossRef]
Proposed Mission: 100 Climate-Neutral Cities by 2030—by and for the Citizens. Report of the Mission Board for Climate-Neutral and Smart
Cities; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2020.
Monteiro, C.S.; Causone, F.; Cunha, S.; Pina, A.; Erba, S. Addressing the challenges of public housing retrofits. Energy Procedia
2017, 134, 442–451. [CrossRef]
Calzada, I. Replicating Smart Cities: The City-to-City Learning Programme in the Replicate EC-H2020-SCC Project. Smart Cities
2020, 3, 978–1003. [CrossRef]
Europe towards Positive Energy Districs. A Compilation of Projects towards Sustainable Urbanization and the Energy Transition; Urban
Europe: Vienna, Austria, 2020.
Amending Directive 2010/31/EU on the Energy Performance of Buildings and Directive 2012/27/EU on Energy Efficiency. In
Proceedings of the Directive (EU) 2018/844 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Brussels, Belgium, 30 May 2018.
Horizon Work Programe 2018–2020. Secure, Clean and Efficient Energy; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2020.
Framework Definition for Positive Energy Districts and Neighbourhoods; Urban Europe: Vienna, Austria, 2019.
Lindholm, O.; Rehman, H.U.; Reda, F. Positioning Positive Energy Districts in European Cities. Buildings 2021, 11, 19. [CrossRef]
Alpagut, B.; Akyürek, Ö.; Mitre, E.M. Positive Energy Districts Methodology and Its Replication Potential. Proceedings 2019, 20, 8.
[CrossRef]
Moreno, A.G.; Vélez, F.; Alpagut, B.; Hernández, P.; Montalvillo, C.S. How to Achieve Positive Energy Districts for Sustainable
Cities: A Proposed Calculation Methodology. Sustainability 2021, 13, 710. [CrossRef]
Good, N.; Ceseña, E.M.; Mancarella, P. Energy Positivity and Flexibility in Districts. In Energy Positive Neighborhoods and Smart
Energy Districts; Elsevier BV: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2017; pp. 7–30.
Skaar, C.; Labonnote, N.; Gradeci, K. From Zero Emission Buildings (ZEB) to Zero Emission Neighbourhoods (ZEN): A Mapping
Review of Algorithm-Based LCA. Sustainability 2018, 10, 2405. [CrossRef]
Zero Emission Neighbourhoods in Smart Cities. Definition, Key Performance Indicators and Assessment Criteria; SINTEF and NTNU:
Trondheim, Norway, 2018.
IPCC. Global Warming of 1.5 ◦ C. An IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global Warming of 1.5 ◦ C above Pre-Industrial Levels and
Related Global Greenhouse Gas Emission Pathways, in the Context of Strengthening the Global Response to the Threat of Climate Change,
Sustainable Development, and Efforts to Eradicate Poverty; Masson-Delmotte, V.P., Zhai, H.-O., Pörtner, D., Roberts, J., Skea, P.R.,
Shukla, A., Pirani, W., Moufouma-Okia, C., Péan, R., Pidcock, S., et al., Eds.; SINTEF and NTNU: Trondheim, Norway, 2018.
World Urbanization Prospects: The 2018 Revision. Available online: https://population.un.org/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2
018-KeyFacts.pdf (accessed on 3 July 2021).
Marquard, E.; Bartke, S.; Font, J.G.I.; Humer, A.; Jonkman, A.; Jürgenson, E.; Marot, N.; Poelmans, L.; Repe, B.; Rybski, R.;
et al. Land Consumption and Land Take: Enhancing Conceptual Clarity for Evaluating Spatial Governance in the EU Context.
Sustainability 2020, 12, 8269. [CrossRef]
European Commission. Directorate General for the Environment, University of the West of England (UWE). Science Communication
Unit. No Net Land Take by 2050? Available online: http://ec.europa.eu/science-environment-policy (accessed on 31 July 2021).
International Energy Agency. Achieving Net-Zero Emissions by World Energy Outlook Report Extract. Available online:
https://www.iea.org/reports/world-energy-outlook-2020/achieving-net-zero-emissions-by-2050 (accessed on 3 July 2021).
Sahakian, M.; Wilhite, H. Making practice theory practicable: Towards more sustainable forms of consumption. J. Consum. Cult.
2013, 14, 25–44. [CrossRef]
Axon, S. “Keeping the ball rolling”: Addressing the enablers of, and barriers to, sustainable lifestyles. J. Environ. Psychol. 2017, 52,
11–25. [CrossRef]
Amending Di-rectives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and Repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC. In Proceedings of the
Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on Energy Efficiency, Brussels, Belgium, 25 October 2012.
Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2010.
Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32010L0031&from=IT (accessed on 30
July 2021).
Sartori, I.; Napolitano, A.; Voss, K. Net zero energy buildings: A consistent definition framework. Energy Build. 2012, 48, 220–232.
[CrossRef]
Erba, S.; Pagliano, L.; Shandiz, S.C.; Pietrobon, M. Energy consumption, thermal comfort and load match: Study of a monitored
nearly Zero Energy Building in Mediterranean climate. IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2019, 609, 062026. [CrossRef]
Pagliano, L.; Erba, S.; Peuportier, B. Definition of Indicators and Assessment Methods for Cost Effective nZEB and Energy+ Buildings—
An AZEB Projects Report. 2019. Available online: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/754174 (accessed on 30 July 2021).
Hermelink, A.; Pagliano, L.; Voss, K.; Zangheri, P.; Schimschar, S.; Armani, R.; Voss, K.; Musall, E. Towards Nearly Zero-Energy
Buildings-Definition of Common Principles under the EPBD—Final Report; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2013.

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

33.
34.

35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

45.
46.
47.

48.
49.

50.

51.
52.

53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.

29 of 32

Erhorn-Kluttig, H.; Erhorn, H. National applications of the NZEB Definition–The Complete Overview. In Concerted Action Energy
Performance of Buildings; Fraunhofer Institute for Building Physics: Stuttgart, Germany, 2018.
Attia, S.; Eleftheriou, P.; Xeni, F.; Morlot, R.; Ménézo, C.; Kostopoulos, V.; Betsi, M.; Kalaitzoglou, I.; Pagliano, L.; Cellura, M.; et al.
Overview and future challenges of nearly zero energy buildings (nZEB) design in Southern Europe. Energy Build. 2017, 155,
439–458. [CrossRef]
EU HProject: AZEB—Affordable Zero Energy Buildings. Available online: https://azeb.eu/ (accessed on 3 July 2021).
ISO 52000-1:Energy Performance of Buildings–Overarching EPB Assessment–Part 1: General Framework and Procedures; International
Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2017.
Shnapp, S.; Paci, D.; Bertoldi, P. Enabling Positive Energy Districts across Europe: Energy Efficiency Couples Renewable Energy; LU:
European Commission. Joint Research Centre: Brussels, Belgium, 2020.
Le Quartier de la Fleuriaye à Carquefou. Available online: http://www.quartierlafleuriaye.fr/ (accessed on 3 July 2021).
Fornebu, Bærum–ZEN Pilot Project. Available online: https://fmezen.no/fornebu-baerum/ (accessed on 3 July 2021).
NyBy–Ny Flyplass (New City–New Airport), Bodø–ZEN Pilot Project. Available online: https://fmezen.no/airportredevelopment-bodo/ (accessed on 3 July 2021).
Agliardi, E.; Cattani, E.; Ferrante, A. Deep energy renovation strategies: A real option approach for add-ons in a social housing
case study. Energy Build. 2018, 161, 1–9. [CrossRef]
Semprini, G.; Gulli, R.; Ferrante, A. Deep regeneration vs shallow renovation to achieve nearly Zero Energy in existing buildings.
Energy Build. 2017, 156, 327–342. [CrossRef]
Shnapp, S.; Sitjà, R.; Laustsen, J. What is a Deep Renovation Definition? Global Buildings Performance Network (GBPN): Paris,
France, 2013.
European Parliament. Report on the Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on Energy Efficiency
and Repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC. Available online: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/A7-2012-0265_EN.html2012 (accessed on 30 July 2021).
Galvin, R. Making the ‘rebound effect’ more useful for performance evaluation of thermal retrofits of existing homes: Defining
the ‘energy savings deficit’ and the ‘energy performance gap’. Energy Build. 2014, 69, 515–524. [CrossRef]
Zou, P.X.; Xu, X.; Sanjayan, J.; Wang, J. Review of 10 years research on building energy performance gap: Life-cycle and
stakeholder perspectives. Energy Build. 2018, 178, 165–181. [CrossRef]
International Performance Measurement and Verification Protocol. Available from: Concepts and Options for Determining
Energy and Water Savings, Vol. 1, International Performance Measurement and Verification Protocol Committee. Available
online: http://www.evo-world.org (accessed on 3 July 2021).
Noris, F.; Napolitano, A.; Lollini, R. Measurement and Verification Protocol for Net Zero Energy Buildings; IEA SHC/ECBS Task
40/Annex 52; International Energy Agency Solar Heating and Cooling Program; EURAC Research: Bolzano, Italy, 2013.
Mavrigiannaki, A.; Gobakis, K.; Kolokotsa, D.; Kalaitzakis, K.; Pisello, A.; Piselli, C.; Gupta, R.; Gregg, M.; Laskari, M.;
Saliari, M.; et al. Measurement and Verification of Zero Energy Settlements: Lessons Learned from Four Pilot Cases in Europe.
Sustainability 2020, 12, 9783. [CrossRef]
Salvia, G.; Morello, E.; Rotondo, F.; Sangalli, A.; Causone, F.; Erba, S.; Pagliano, L. Performance Gap and Occupant Behavior in
Building Retrofit: Focus on Dynamics of Change and Continuity in the Practice of Indoor Heating. Sustainability 2020, 12, 5820.
[CrossRef]
Cozza, S.; Chambers, J. GAPxPLORE: Energy Performance Gap in Existing, New, and Renovated Buildings. Learning from Large-Scale
Datasets; Office Fédéral de l’Énergie OFEN: Geneva, Switzerland, 2019.
Bulc, V. Speech at Conference on “Multimodal Sustainable Transport: Which Role for the Internalisation of External Costs?”.
Available online: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/speech-conference-multimodal-sustainable-transport-which-violeta-bulc/
(accessed on 3 July 2021).
Krogstrup, S.; Oman, W. Macroeconomic and Financial Policies for Climate Change Mitigation: A Review of the Literature; International
Monetary Fund: Bretton Woods, NH, USA, 2019.
EN ISO 52016-1:Energy Performance of Buildings—Energy needs for Heating and Cooling, Internal Temperatures and Sensible and Latent
Heat Loads-Part 1: Calculation Procedures; European Committee for Standardization: Brussels, Belgium, 2017.
Huber, M.; Dimkova, D.; Hamacher, T. Integration of wind and solar power in Europe: Assessment of flexibility requirements.
Energy 2014, 69, 236–246. [CrossRef]
Jensen, S.Ø.; Marszal, A.J.; Lollini, R.; Pasut, W.; Knotzer, A.; Engelmann, P.; Stafford, A.; Reynders, G. IEA EBC Annex 67 Energy
Flexible Buildings. Energy Build. 2017, 155, 25–34. [CrossRef]
Hedman, Å.; Rehman, H.; Gabaldón, A.; Bisello, A.; Albert-Seifried, V.; Zhang, X.; Guarino, F.; Grynning, S.; Eicker, U.; Neumann,
H.-M.; et al. IEA EBC Annex83 Positive Energy Districts. Buildings 2021, 11, 130. [CrossRef]
Junker, R.G.; Azar, A.G.; Lopes, R.A.; Lindberg, K.B.; Reynders, G.; Relan, R.; Madsen, H. Characterizing the energy flexibility of
buildings and districts. Appl. Energy 2018, 225, 175–182. [CrossRef]
Vigna, I.; Pernetti, R.; Pasut, W.; Lollini, R. New domain for promoting energy efficiency: Energy Flexible Building Cluster.
Sustain. Cities Soc. 2018, 38, 526–533. [CrossRef]
Reynders, G.; Lopes, R.A.; Marszal, A.J.; Aelenei, D.; Martins, J.; Saelens, D. Energy flexible buildings: An evaluation of definitions
and quantification methodologies applied to thermal storage. Energy Build. 2018, 166, 372–390. [CrossRef]

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.

76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.

82.

83.
84.
85.
86.

87.
88.
89.

30 of 32

Foteinaki, K.; Li, R.; Heller, A.; Rode, C. Heating system energy flexibility of low-energy residential buildings. Energy Build. 2018,
180, 95–108. [CrossRef]
Favre, B.; Peuportier, B. Application of dynamic programming to study load shifting in buildings. Energy Build. 2014, 82, 57–64.
[CrossRef]
Le Dréau, J.; Heiselberg, P. Energy flexibility of residential buildings using short term heat storage in the thermal mass. Energy
2016, 111, 991–1002. [CrossRef]
Liu, M.; Heiselberg, P. Energy flexibility of a nearly zero-energy building with weather predictive control on a convective building
energy system and evaluated with different metrics. Appl. Energy 2019, 233, 764–775. [CrossRef]
Foteinaki, K.; Li, R.; Péan, T.; Rode, C.; Salom, J. Evaluation of energy flexibility of low-energy residential buildings connected to
district heating. Energy Build. 2020, 213, 109804. [CrossRef]
Reynders, G.; Diriken, J.; Saelens, D. Generic characterization method for energy flexibility: Applied to structural thermal storage
in residential buildings. Appl. Energy 2017, 198, 192–202. [CrossRef]
Johra, H.; Heiselberg, P.; Le Dréau, J. Influence of envelope, structural thermal mass and indoor content on the building heating
energy flexibility. Energy Build. 2019, 183, 325–339. [CrossRef]
Reynders, G.; Nuytten, T.; Saelens, D. Potential of structural thermal mass for demand-side management in dwellings. Build.
Environ. 2013, 64, 187–199. [CrossRef]
Reilly, A.; Kinnane, O. The impact of thermal mass on building energy consumption. Appl. Energy 2017, 198, 108–121. [CrossRef]
Stinner, S.; Huchtemann, K.; Müller, D. Quantifying the operational flexibility of building energy systems with thermal energy
storages. Appl. Energy 2016, 181, 140–154. [CrossRef]
Kuczyński, T.; Staszczuk, A. Experimental study of the influence of thermal mass on thermal comfort and cooling energy demand
in residential buildings. Energy 2020, 195, 116984. [CrossRef]
Orosa, J.A.; Oliveira, A. A field study on building inertia and its effects on indoor thermal environment. Renew. Energy 2012, 37,
89–96. [CrossRef]
Panão, M.O.; Mateus, N.M.; Da Graça, G.C. Measured and modeled performance of internal mass as a thermal energy battery for
energy flexible residential buildings. Appl. Energy 2019, 239, 252–267. [CrossRef]
Kensby, J.; Trüschel, A.; Dalenbäck, J.-O. Potential of residential buildings as thermal energy storage in district heating systems—
Results from a pilot test. Appl. Energy 2015, 137, 773–781. [CrossRef]
EN 16798-1:Energy Performance of Buildings-Ventilation for Buildings-Part 1: Indoor Environmental Input Parameters for Design and
Assessment of Energy Performance of Buildings Addressing Indoor Air Quality, Thermal Environment, Lighting and Acoustics-Module
M1-6; European Committee for Standardization: Brussels, Belgium, 2019.
ANSI/ASHRAE Standard 55-Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy; American Society of Heating, Refrigerating
and Air-Conditioning Engineers: Atlanta, GA, USA, 2020.
Illich, I. Energy and Equity; Harper & Row: New York, NY, USA, 1978.
Goldemberg, J.; Johansson, T.B.; Reddy, A.K.N.; Williams, R.H. Basic Needs and Much More with One Kilowatt per Capita. Ambio
1985, 14, 190–200.
Sachs, W. Die vier E’s-Merkposten für Einen Maß-Vollen Wirtschaftsstil; in Politische Ökologie; nr. 33, 69–72; Wuppertal Institut:
Wuppertal, Germany, 1993.
Sachs, W. Planet Dialectics: Explorations in Environment and Development; Zed Books Ltd.: London, UK, 1999.
Toulouse, E.; Sahakian, M.; Lorek, S.; Bohnenberger, K.; Bierwirth, A.; Leuser, L. Energy Sufficiency: How Can Research Better
Help and Inform Policy-Making? ECEEE Summer Study Proceedings. Available online: https://www.eceee.org/library/
conference_proceedings/eceee_Summer_Studies/2019/2-whats-next-in-energy-policy/energy-sufficiency-how-can-researchbetter-help-and-inform-policy-making/ (accessed on 30 July 2021).
Berg, N.J.V.D.; Hof, A.F.; Akenji, L.; Edelenbosch, O.Y.; van Sluisveld, M.A.; Timmer, V.J.; van Vuuren, D.P. Improved modelling
of lifestyle changes in Integrated Assessment Models: Cross-disciplinary insights from methodologies and theories. Energy Strat.
Rev. 2019, 26, 100420. [CrossRef]
Samadi, S.; Gröne, M.-C.; Schneidewind, U.; Luhmann, H.-J.; Venjakob, J.; Best, B. Sufficiency in energy scenario studies: Taking
the potential benefits of lifestyle changes into account. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2017, 124, 126–134. [CrossRef]
Creutzig, F.; Roy, J.; Lamb, W.F.; Azevedo, I.M.; De Bruin, W.B.; Dalkmann, H.; Edelenbosch, O.Y.; Geels, F.W.; Grubler, A.;
Hepburn, C.; et al. Towards demand-side solutions for mitigating climate change. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2018, 8, 260–263. [CrossRef]
Plan Directeur de l’Énergie 2020–2030 République et Canton de Genève; République et Canton de Genève: Genève, Switzerland, 2020.
Available online: https://www.ge.ch/document/22488/telecharger (accessed on 31 July 2021).
Creutzig, F.; Callaghan, M.W.; Ramakrishnan, A.; Javaid, A.; Niamir, L.; Minx, J.C.; Müller-Hansen, F.; Sovacool, B.K.; Afroz, Z.;
Andor, M.; et al. Reviewing the scope and thematic focus of 100 000 publications on energy consumption, services and social
aspects of climate change: A big data approach to demand-side mitigation. Environ. Res. Lett. 2021, 16, 033001. [CrossRef]
Raworth, K. Doughnut Economics. Seven Ways to Think Like a 21st Century Economist; Joni Praded, Chelsea Green Publishing: White
River Junction, VT, USA, 2017.
Jackson, T. Prosperity without Growth. Foundations for the Economy of Tomorrow, 2nd ed.; Routledge: London, UK, 2016.
Burke, M.J. Energy-Sufficiency for a Just Transition: A Systematic Review. Energies 2020, 13, 2444. [CrossRef]

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

90.
91.
92.

93.
94.
95.
96.
97.
98.
99.
100.
101.
102.

103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.

110.
111.
112.
113.
114.
115.
116.
117.

31 of 32

Brown, H.S.; Vergragt, P.J. From consumerism to wellbeing: Toward a cultural transition? J. Clean. Prod. 2016, 132, 308–317.
[CrossRef]
Douglas, M.J.; Watkins, S.J.; Gorman, D.R.; Higgins, M. Are cars the new tobacco? J. Public Health 2011, 33, 160–169. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Impact de La Pollution de L’air Ambiant Sur la Mortalité en France Métropolitaine. Réduction en Lien Avec le Confinement du Printemps
2020 et Nouvelles Données sur le Poids Total Pour la Période 2016–2019; Santé Publique France: Paris, France, 2021. Available
online: https://www.santepubliquefrance.fr/determinants-de-sante/pollution-et-sante/air/documents/enquetes-etudes/
impact-de-pollution-de-l-air-ambiant-sur-la-mortalite-en-france-metropolitaine.-reduction-en-lien-avec-le-confinement-duprintemps-2020-et-nouvelle (accessed on 30 July 2021).
Becker, D.A.; Browning, M.H. Chapter 3: Total area greenness is associated with lower per-capita medicare spending, but blue
spaces are not. City Environ. Interact. 2021, 2021, 100063. [CrossRef]
Wiedmann, T.; Lenzen, M.; Keyßer, L.T.; Steinberger, J.K. Scientists’ warning on affluence. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 1–10. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Ivanova, D.; Barrett, J.; Wiedenhofer, D.; Macura, B.; Callaghan, M.W.; Creutzig, F. Quantifying the potential for climate change
mitigation of consumption options. Environ. Res. Lett. 2020, 15, 093001. [CrossRef]
Akenji, L.; Chen, H. A Framework for Shaping Sustainable Lifestyles. Determinants and Strategies; UNEP: Nairobi, Kenya, 2016.
Fanger, P.O. Thermal Comfort, Analysis and Applications in Environmental Engineering; McGraw-Hill Book Company: New York, NY,
USA, 1970.
de Dear, R. A global database of thermal comfort field experiments. ASHRAE Trans. 1998, 104, 1141–1152.
Ličina, V.F.; Cheung, T.; Zhang, H.; de Dear, R.; Parkinson, T.; Arens, E.; Chun, C.; Schiavon, S.; Luo, M.; Brager, G.; et al.
Development of the ASHRAE Global Thermal Comfort Database II. Build. Environ. 2018, 142, 502–512. [CrossRef]
Fanger, P.O.; Toftum, J. Extension of the PMV model to non-air-conditioned buildings in warm climates. Energy Build. 2002, 34,
533–536. [CrossRef]
Pagliano, L.; Zangheri, P. Comfort models and cooling of buildings in the Mediterranean zone. Adv. Build. Energy Res. 2010, 4,
167–200. [CrossRef]
Carlucci, S.; Erba, S.; Pagliano, L.; de Dear, R. ASHRAE Likelihood of Dissatisfaction: A new right-here and right-now thermal
comfort index for assessing the Likelihood of Dissatisfaction according to the ASHRAE adaptive comfort model. Energy Build.
2021, in press. [CrossRef]
Lipczynska, A.; Schiavon, S.; Graham, L.T. Thermal comfort and self-reported productivity in an office with ceiling fans in the
tropics. Build. Environ. 2018, 135, 202–212. [CrossRef]
He, Y.; Chen, W.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, H. Review of fan-use rates in field studies and their effects on thermal comfort, energy
conservation, and human productivity. Energy Build. 2019, 194, 140–162. [CrossRef]
Raftery, P. CBE Fan Tool, Center for the Built Environment, University of California Berkeley. 2019. Available online: Cbe.berkeley.
edu/fan-tool (accessed on 30 July 2021).
Raftery, P.; Fizer, J.; Chen, W.; He, Y.; Zhang, H.; Arens, E.; Schiavon, S.; Paliaga, G. Ceiling fans: Predicting indoor air speeds
based on full scale laboratory measurements. Build. Environ. 2019, 155, 210–223. [CrossRef]
Erba, S.; Sangalli, A.; Pagliano, L. Present and future potential of natural night ventilation in nZEBs. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ.
Sci. 2019, 296. [CrossRef]
Dama, A.; De Lena, E.; Masera, G.; Pagliano, L.; Ruta, M.; Zangheri, P. Design and Passive Strategies Optimization Towards Zero
Energy Target: The Case Study of an Experimental Office Building in Milan. Simul. Optim. Conf. 2014, 7. [CrossRef]
Sfakianaki, A.; Santamouris, M.; Hutchins, M.; Nichol, F.; Wilson, M.; Pagliano, L.; Pohl, W.; Alexandre, J.; Freire, A. Energy
Consumption Variation due to Different Thermal Comfort Categorization Introduced by European Standard EN 15251 for New
Building Design and Major Rehabilitations. Int. J. Vent. 2011, 10, 195–204. [CrossRef]
Arens, E.; Humphreys, M.A.; de Dear, R.; Zhang, H. Are ‘class A’ temperature requirements realistic or desirable? Build. Environ.
2010, 45, 4–10. [CrossRef]
Alfano, F.R.D.; Palella, B.I.; Riccio, G. The role of measurement accuracy on the thermal environment assessment by means of
PMV index. Build. Environ. 2011, 46, 1361–1369. [CrossRef]
International Standard Organization. ISO 7730:Ergonomics of the Thermal Environment—Analytical Determination and Interpretation
of Thermal Comfort Using Calculation of the PMV and PPD Indices and Local Thermal Comfort Criteria; ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2005.
Aliagha, G.U.; Cin, N.Y. Perceptions of Malaysian Office Workers on the Adoption of the Japanese Cool Biz Concept of Energy
Conservation. J. Asian Afr. Stud. 2013, 48, 427–446. [CrossRef]
The District of Florés Malacca. Available online: https://www.smartweb.re/envirobat/files/fiches_envirobat_reunion/
logements/FICHE_ENVIROBAT_Reunion_FLORES_MALACCA.pdf (accessed on 3 July 2021).
Kleerekoper, L.; Esch, M.P.-V.; Salcedo, T.B. How to make a city climate-proof, addressing the urban heat island effect. Resour.
Conserv. Recycl. 2012, 64, 30–38. [CrossRef]
Mariotti, I.; Akhavan, M.; Rossi, F. The preferred location of coworking spaces in Italy: An empirical investigation in urban and
peripheral areas. Eur. Plan. Stud. 2021, 1–23. [CrossRef]
Akhavan, M.; Mariotti, I.; Astolfi, L.; Canevari, A. Coworking Spaces and New Social Relations: A Focus on the Social Streets in
Italy. Urban Sci. 2018, 3, 2. [CrossRef]

Energies 2021, 14, 4697

32 of 32

118. Guth, C. The New Cycle Network and Speed Limit Areas in Paris. First Results and Lessons Learnt. Available online: https:
//www.ridef2.com/uploads/9/5/1/2/95124774/20191216_ms_guth_on_plan_velo_paris_x_ridef_milano.pdf (accessed on 3
July 2021).
119. Kraus, S.; Koch, N. Provisional COVID-19 infrastructure induces large, rapid increases in cycling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2021, 118.
[CrossRef]
120. Jackson, T. Zero Carbon Sooner—The Case for an Early Zero Carbon Target for the UK. Available online: https://www.cusp.ac.
uk/wp-content/uploads/WP18%E2%80%94Zero-carbon-sooner.pdf (accessed on 30 July 2021).
121. Mundaca, L.; Ürge-Vorsatz, D.; Wilson, C. Demand-side approaches for limiting global warming to 1.5 ◦ C. Energy Effic. 2019, 12,
343–362. [CrossRef]
122. Santamouris, M.; Kolokotsa, D. Urban Climate Mitigation Techniques; Routledge: London, UK, 2016.
123. Ip, K.; She, K. Waste heat recovery from showers: Case study of a university sport facility in the UK. In Proceedings of the Water
Efficiency Conference, Coventry UK, 7–9 September 2016.
124. EN 14825:Air Conditioners, Liquid Chilling Packages and Heat Pumps, with Electrically Driven Compressors, for Space Heating and
Cooling-Testing and Rating at Part Load Conditions and Calculation of Seasonal Performance; European Committee for Standardization:
Brussels, Belgium, 2018.
125. Causone, F.; Carlucci, S.; Ferrando, M.; Marchenko, A.; Erba, S. A data-driven procedure to model occupancy and occupant-related
electric load profiles in residential buildings for energy simulation. Energy Build. 2019, 202, 109342. [CrossRef]
126. International Organization for Standardization. ISO 15927-6:Hygrothermal Performance of Buildings—Calculation and Presentation of
Climatic Data Accumulated Temperature Differences (Degree-Days); International Organization for Standardisationn (IOS): Geneva,
Switzerland, 2007.
127. Pagliano, L.; Armani, R.; Erba, S.; Sangalli, A. Highly Insulated Buildings as a Crucial Element for Smart Cities, Grid Balancing
and Energy Storage for Renewables. Knauf Insulation Report. 2020. Available online: https://www.knaufinsulation.com/news/
thermal-insulation-of-buildings-for-a-smart-and-renewable-energy-system (accessed on 31 July 2021).
128. Joint Research Centre. Institute for Energy and Transport. Individual Mobility: From Conventional to Electric Cars; LU: Publications
Office, European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2015.
129. Festa, M. Rapporto Immobiliare Il Settore Residenziale. 2019. Available online: https://www.agenziaentrate.gov.it/portale/
documents/20143/263076/rapporto+immobiliare2019+ri_RI2019_Residenziale_20190523.pdf/a175f856-2363-dda7-da64-b1c0
e544eb12 (accessed on 31 July 2021).
130. Lenoir, A.; Thellier, F.; Garde, F. Towards Net Zero Energy Buildings in Hot Climate, Part 2: Experimental Feedback. ASHRAE
Trans. 2011, 117, 8.
131. Relazione Annuale. Stato dei Servizi 2019. ARERA 2019. Available online: https://www.arera.it/allegati/relaz_ann/19/RA19_
volume1.pdf (accessed on 30 July 2021).
132. Brischke, L.-A.; Lehmann, F.; Leuser, L.; Thomas, S.; Baedeker, C. Energy Sufficiency in Private Households Enabled by Adequate
Appliances, ECEEE Summer Study Proceedings. 2015. Available online: https://epub.wupperinst.org/frontdoor/deliver/index/
docId/5932/file/5932_Brischke.pdf (accessed on 30 July 2021).
133. Consigli Piani di Cottura. Available online: https://www.topten.ch/private/adviser/consigli-piani-di-cottura (accessed on 3
July 2021).
134. European Commission. Ecodesign and Energy Labelling Preparatory Study on Electric Kettles. Available online: https://ec.
europa.eu/energy/studies_main/preparatory-studies/ecodesign-and-energy-labelling-preparatory-study-electric-kettles_en
(accessed on 3 July 2021).
135. Patrão, C.; Rivet, L.; Fong, J.; de Almeida, A. Energy Efficient Elevators and Escalators. ECEEE 2009 Summer Study Act! Innovate!
Deliver! Reducing Energy Demand Sustainably Proceedings. 2009. Available online: https://www.eceee.org/static/media/
uploads/site-2/library/conference_proceedings/eceee_Summer_Studies/2009/Panel_4/4.037/paper.pdf (accessed on 30 July
2021).
136. SIA 2024:2015 Costruzione. Dati D’utilizzo di Locali per L’energia e L’impiantistica Degli Edifici. 2015. Available online:
http://shop.sia.ch/normenwerk/architekt/sia%202024/i/D/Product (accessed on 31 July 2021).
137. Abitudini di Guida Degli Italiani nel 2018 in Seguito all’analisi dei Dati Delle Scatole Nere Installate Nelle Automobile; Osservatorio
UnipolSai Assicurazioni: Bologna, Italy, 2019.
138. L’Efficienza Energetica nei Trasporti; ENEA; ENEA (Agenzia Nazionale per le Nuove Tecnologie, l’Energia e lo Sviluppo Economico
Sostenibile): Roma, Italy, 2011.
139. Šúri, M.; Huld, T.; Dunlop, E.D.; Ossenbrink, H.A. Potential of solar electricity generation in the European Union member states
and candidate countries. Sol. Energy 2007, 81, 1295–1305. [CrossRef]

