)XWXUH&LWLHV
DQG(QYLURQPHQW

Design, Modelling and
Performance Evaluation of a
Positive Energy District in a
Danish Island

TECHNICAL ARTICLE

BARBARA KRISTIN HOLMSUND JEPSEN
TOM WALTHER HAUT
MUHYIDDINE JRADI
*Author affiliations can be found in the back matter of this article

ABSTRACT
Nowadays, cities and districts are becoming more and more interconnected in terms
of energy supply systems, and the transition towards smart connected thermal and
electrical grids is inevitable. While single building-level modelling has demonstrated
numerous technical and economic benefits, it is vital to scale up the approach and
consider the larger picture of cluster of buildings, districts, and cities. The island of
Ærø in Denmark has an ambitious goal to become the first CO2 neutral and renewable
energy self-sufficient Danish Island by 2025, as well as becoming a fossil-fuel free island
by 2030. With the ambitious energy and environmental aims of Ærø island, this work
aims to investigate the capability of establishing part of the island as the first Danish
positive energy district (PED) and assess various design scenarios and possibilities
of upgrading/modifying the current scheme and composition of energy supply and
distribution. An open-source urban scale modelling tool is used, City Energy Analyst
(CEA), where the district is modelled considering all specifications and characteristics
of buildings and the corresponding energy supply systems. The base case scenario
is simulated, and the performance is calibrated using actual data. Then, multiple
energy improvement measures targeting the buildings envelope as well as the energy
generation and supply systems are developed and simulated to assess the impact
on the overall energy consumption for heating and electricity. The results show that
a PED can be established employing an improvement package of envelope-targeting
measures, energy systems upgrades and renewable energy systems expansion.

CORRESPONDING AUTHOR:
Muhyiddine Jradi
Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller
Institute, University of
Southern Denmark, DK
mjr@mmmi.sdu.dk

KEYWORDS:
Buildings; Positive Energy
Districts; Performance
Evaluation; Energy Planning;
Energy Analysis
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Jepsen, BKH, Haut, TW
and Jradi, M. 2022. Design,
Modelling and Performance
Evaluation of a Positive Energy
District in a Danish Island.
Future Cities and Environment,
8(1): 1, 1–15. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.5334/fce.146

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

INTRODUCTION
To reduce the greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions, the
European Commission (EC) has set a long-term strategy
to implement sustainable solutions in the pursue for
a net zero GHG emission in the EU by 2050 (European
Commission, 2019). One of the key milestones in this
plan is to improve the energy efficiency in buildings, as
they are responsible for 40% of energy consumption and
around 35% of the emissions (EC, A, 2018). Considering
this contribution to both energy consumption and
greenhouse gas emissions, it is vital to improve the
design and setup of newly built buildings in addition to
enhancing the performance and operation of existing
buildings through systematic energy efficient and costeffective retrofitting processes. Thus, the EU has pledged
to attain an overall 55% carbon reduction, compared to
1990, by 2030 (European Union, 2021).
A large body of theoretical and experimental work
was devoted to enhancing the level of buildings control
and management and optimization of the overall energy
performance (X. Li, 2014) (M. Jradi, 2018) (A.A.A. Gassar,
2020). In this context, dynamic energy modelling and
simulation has served as a key approach towards
realizing the impacts of improving the building stock
energy performance and reporting the added value
on the technical, economic and environmental levels.
Employing accurate building models and predictions,
better building designs have been delivered, both for
newly built buildings and retrofitted buildings, and the
building response to various dynamic changes within
the building environment was assessed and analysed
from different perspectives (M. Jradi, 2018) Generally,
building energy modelling has been used extensively in
the literature as a tool for better design, operation and
optimization of buildings performance. Overall, energy
modelling and simulation of the performance of single
buildings and facilities is a very well mature domain
and readily available commercial tools are widely used
allowing accurate building modelling and performance
predictions. In terms of the economic feasibility of
using building energy modelling, it was reported that
the development of a detailed building dynamic energy
model has an overall payback period of around 1–2
months (HOK, 2016). Such short payback period supports
the use of such model-driven approaches to aid decisionmaking in the context of designing, operating, controlling,
and commissioning of new and existing buildings.
In the recent years, there has been a growing number
of studies and investigations dealing with energy
modelling, analysis and performance optimisation of
urban areas, districts, and cities (Ali, et al., 2021). The
complexity of building cluster simulations is addressed
by Eicker in “Urban energy systems for low carbon
cities’’ and it is assessed that the most accurate cluster
models need many inputs and often the predictions

2

are not as accurate as single building models, as it is
hard to schedule human behaviour, urban climate, and
characterize the complexity of a single building on a
larger basis. (Zhengwei Li, 2016) (Eicker, 2019).
The approach of dealing with building clusters is still
a relatively unmature domain and therefore there are
no validated standard procedures when modelling large
building clusters. This affects the prediction accuracy
and hinders direct comparisons. (Eicker, 2019,). Lately
many different cluster models and methodologies for
predicting energy consumption of building districts and
cities on small/medium scale level have been developed
i.e., CitySim, UrbanSim “UCB”, Urban Modelling Interface
“UMI” and City Energy Analyst “CEA’’. All these tools
estimate the energy demand of an area dependent on
the surroundings, area and climate (Marcel Bruse, 2015)
(Alaia Sola, 2020) (Fonseca, 2016).
Shi et al. (Shi, 2017) has reviewed different methods,
and developed a workflow for an optimization model
of an urban design, consisting of three steps; the
data collection step, the generation step where the
urban design and constraints are introduced, and the
optimization step where the energy performance is
improved and the optimal solution is found. Delmastro et
al. (Delmastro C., 2015) reported that when considering
building clusters and areas for analysis, the energy
consumption of the forming building stock is affected
by multiple factors. This includes the design of the
built environment under investigation, the interaction
between the buildings and open spaces in the district,
the building envelope and constructions, the socioeconomic characteristics of the population in the specific
area, the type of shades and obstructions available, and
most importantly, the weather conditions.
One of the recent initiatives towards improving the
energy performance of cities and districts on a large
scale is the establishment of the so called ‘Positive Energy
Districts’ (PED) (Lindholm O, 2021). The basic principle of
PEDs is the establishment of an area within the boundaries
of a city or large district, which is capable of producing
more energy than consumed on a yearly net level. In this
regard, such areas are flexible enough to dynamically
respond to the stochastic variation of the energy market,
in addition to supporting the minimization of the impact
on the connected centralized energy networks. This is
established using alternative decentralised solutions,
renewable energy systems, energy storage techniques
and better control and management patterns. Aiming
to attain the energy and environmental goals in the EU,
the EU Commission has proposed generic regulatory
conditions to support the implementation of Positive
Energy Districts in real urban concept by 2050. Although
they bring numerous technical and economic benefits,
PEDs are still in the early development stage, and the
goal for achieving a pure PED is still more an aim than
a reality. Nevertheless, the EU has launched a project

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

3

aiming to plan and develop a hundred PEDs by 2025
(Monti, 2016) (Planet, 2020). This could be a major driver
towards establishing such PEDs in Europe as well as in
the rest of the world regions.
Nevertheless,
most
theoretical
investigations
and practical applications developed in the recent
decades have targeted single buildings or individual
building facilities. This includes the design of energy
efficient buildings on the level of building envelope and
constructions, energy systems and building services.
While single building-level modelling has demonstrated
numerous technical and economic benefits, it is vital to
scale up the approach and consider the larger picture
of cluster of buildings, districts, and cities. Nowadays,
cities and districts are becoming more and more
interconnected in terms of energy supply systems, and
the transition towards smart connected thermal and
electrical grids is inevitable but also has multiple benefits
on both demand-side and supply-side levels (Dakheel
A., 2020). With such large-scale evolvement of smart
and flexible grids, there is an urgent need to move
from analysing the performance of single buildings and
upscaling the efforts to integrated building clusters and
interconnected energy efficient and flexible cities and
neighbourhoods. There is currently a scarcity of validated
procedures and standards when it comes to modelling
large scale building clusters, devoted to district or city
level, which affects the overall results accuracy and
consistency (Jepsen et al., 2020).
In the recent decades, legislations, theoretical
investigations, and practical applications in Denmark
have been concentrated on improving the design
and operation of single buildings and facilities. This
study aims at scaling up the efforts and deals with
modelling, simulation, and improvement of the
performance on a district/city level. A case study of
an island district is considered aiming to establish
and assess the first Danish positive energy district
employing dynamic energy modelling. An open-source
urban scale modelling tool is used, City Energy Analyst
(CEA), where the district is modelled considering all
specifications and characteristics of buildings and the
corresponding energy supply systems. The base case
scenario is simulated, and the performance is calibrated
using actual data. Then, multiple energy improvement
measures targeting the buildings envelope as well
as the energy generation and supply systems are
developed and simulated to assess the impact on the
overall energy consumption for heating and electricity.
Considering the results of the improvement measures, a
number of improvement packages are designed, each
having a collection of energy efficiency measures, and
then integrated in CEA. The district performance under
each scenario is simulated where the consumption
is predicted and compared to the base case scenario.

The case study island considered has ambitious aims
to expand its renewable energy systems capacity and
become fossil-fuel free in 2030. The study will provide
preliminary results, forming a basis to aid energy system
future retrofitting and upgrading in the district with the
aim to establish the first PED in Denmark in compliance
with the EU strategy.

CITY-LEVEL ENERGY MODELLING
METHODOLOGY
In this work, the City Energy Analyst (CEA) urban modelling
tool is employed and used to develop an interconnected
district-level energy model and investigate various
energy improvement measures and scenarios aiming
to enhance the overall energy performance. In this
section, a short presentation of the CEA tool is provided,
highlighting the methodology for modelling, simulation
and prediction.

CITY ENERGY ANALYST FOR URBAN
MODELLING
As stated in the introduction, a massive amount
of research and investigations dealing with single
buildings and their performance improvement have
been reported and analysed, but there is a scarcity
when it comes to tools targeting energy performance
modelling and assessment on the level of streets,
districts, or cities. One of the emerging tools for urbanscale modelling and analysis is the City Energy Analyst
(CEA). CEA is a free open-source tool for analysis &
optimisation of urban energy systems (The A/S group –
ETH Zurich). It was developed and released in 2017
by the ETH Zurich in Switzerland (The A/S Group – ETH
Zurich). The CEA tool employs a white box modelling
approach where all area/district details are included as
inputs providing large flexibility in terms of modelling
and scenarios design. In terms of interface, CEA has
seven databases and six calculation modules combined
within a user-friendly interface for design and operation
inputs and a comprehensive results presentation
section. Overall, CEA’s integrated modelling and
simulation platform with the supporting databases
and calculation modules has major advantages and
large capabilities in the field of urban scale modelling.
This includes mainly the detailed and comprehensive
modelling approach, possibilities for multiple scenarios
design and simulations and user-friendly interface and
detailed results presentation platform.
With its flexible modelling and design approach, CEA
covers many applications for demand prediction, energy
system analysis and optimisation in one combined
platform. Even though the program is based on Python
scripting, the developed interface and results dashboard

4

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

ensure an easy usage and understanding. In general, the
tool is divided into four parts:
•
•
•
•

Input Data
Database
Tools
Output Data

When a new project is initiated, the database and several
inputs such as zone, district, terrain or weather must
be chosen as these are important for the geospatial
data initiation and calling. The program offers a limited
selection of weather files for Switzerland and Singapore,
while user files can be inputted in epw format. Afterwards,
a map is opened which offers the possibility to select/
choose the district to be investigated. Using built-in
identification tools, CEA can automatically identify
buildings in this area, which then are ready to be edited.
The following characteristics can thus be changed and
upgraded:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Zone
○○ Name, hight, floors
Typology
○○ Year, Usage-distribution
Air-conditioning System
○○ Type of HVAC, water supply
Internal Loads
○○ Occupancy density, loads
Indoor Comfort
○○ Temperature setpoint, humidity
Architecture
○○ Construction Types of walls, floors, windows, etc.
Supply Systems
○○ Type of cooling, hot water, electricity, heat supply
Surroundings
○○ Neighbouring buildings
Schedules
○○ Occupancy, appliances, lighting, water, heating, etc.

When all data are set, CEA calls several corresponding
functions, also called tools that are the base of the
analysis. Using such functions, the results regarding
demand forecasting, radiation, LCA, energy potentials,
network layouts or others are calculated. Hereby,
it should be started with the “Archetypes System”,
whereafter it is possible to run the other tools. When
a tool cannot be run, a solution-hint is given to the
user. In the Output Section, the results can be seen in
integrated interactive dashboards. There is a wide range
of outputs and predictions including energy demand
bars, indoor comfort maps and economic analysis and
evaluation trends. A more detailed overview of the CEA
modelling and design methodology can be seen in
Figure 1.

THE CASE STUDY
In this work, a case study of a district in a Danish island
is chosen as a basis for modelling, simulation and energy
performance improvement investigations using CEA. The
city of Rise was chosen, which is located in Southern
Denmark on the island of Ærø, shown in Figure 2.
Ærø is a small island located in the southern
archipelago of Denmark, having a total area of 88 km2
and around 6200 inhabitants. The island of Ærø has
an ambitious goal to become the first CO2 neutral and
renewable energy self-sufficient Danish Island by 2025,
as well as becoming a fossil-fuel free island by 2030
[28]. Currently, around 55% of the island’s energy supply
comes from solar, wind and biomass-driven systems.
The island has six 2 MW wind turbines and PV systems
are deployed on a large scale in the residential sector
with a current capacity of around 1.35 MW. To satisfy
the island heating demands, three major district heating
plants are employed, fulfilling around 65% of the total
island heat consumption.
With the ambitious energy and environmental aims of
Ærø island, this work aims to investigate the capability of
establishing part of the island as the first Danish positive
energy district and assess various design scenarios and
possibilities of upgrading/modifying the current scheme
and composition of energy supply and distribution. The
selected Rise district is supplied by the company “Rise
Fjernvarme” to satisfy district heating needs for the
majority of the houses and buildings. The district heating
system produces around 2,250 MWh per year, where
the production is divided equally between wood pellets
and solar thermal heat (Rise Fjernvarme, 2019). The next
sections will highlight and describe the process of modelling,
analysis and enhancement of the energy system design in
Rise using the CEA tool methodology described earlier.

INPUT DATA DESCRIPTION
To model and assess the Rise district energy performance,
the corresponding characteristics and inputs needs to be
established in the CEA tool. As mentioned earlier, the
tool starts to map the area and determine the buildings
located in the chosen district. Then, the number of floors
and shadowing from neighbouring buildings can be
adjusted and integrated. Figures 3 and 4 show a close-up
of the map area as modelled in CEA with 3D models of
the buildings considered.
Although CEA provides valuable benefits and
capabilities in terms of the flexible energy modelling
approach and the user-friendly interface, the tool has also
some drawbacks which need to be addressed manually
by the modeller. This includes some limitations in the
automated reading and modelling of the buildings in the
selected area. Some issues were encountered including
the failure in automatically reading the number of floors

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

Figure 1 CEA Modelling and Assessment Methodology.

Figure 2 Rise location on Ærø island.

5

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

6

Figure 3 The modelled area in CEA, the city of Rise.

Figure 4 One street example in Rise, shown in CEA.

for each building and building orientation. In addition,
other objects such as sheds, bins and empty boxes were
read as buildings. Regarding garages or canopies, which
are often located directly next to the house, the problem

is that they are seen as part of the building and therefore
living areas which increases the conditioned area that
must be heated. Thus, the Danish Building and Housing
Register (BBR) data (Bygnings- og Boligregistret, 2018),

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

7

which includes detailed specifications on all Danish
buildings, was used to manually correct the flaws and
upgrade the building models in CEA.
A preliminary analysis was made to show the
importance of such manually implemented alterations.
Table 1 compares the real-life consumption of electricity,
with the baseline scenario with and without the
alterations. It is shown that the electricity predictions
gap decreases from 25% to only 6% when the issues of
geometry are solved including the elimination of faulty
read building areas.
The CEA tool needs weather data as an input to
determine and evaluate the energy performance of the
buildings in the selected district. As there are not readily
default weather data available for the island of Ærø, data
for the island of Tåsinge were used (Climate One Building,
u.d.). The distance between these two islands is only 20
kilometres. In the weather file, the temperature data
were updated to original data from Ærø, while all other
data remained on Tåsinge data (ÆRØ, 2020). Thus, the
assumption of weather conditions has a little impact on
the area energy analysis.

The inputs for these categories are explained in the
following sections.

MODELLING RISE DISTRICT IN THE CEA-TOOL
As the geometrical information of the buildings are
updated and the weather conditions are established in
CEA, the rest of the information regarding the Rise district
needs to be introduced in the tool to compete the model.
Obviously, the more inputs and details introduced, the
more accurate the model will be. These include:
•
•
•
•
•

Typology
Architecture/envelope
Internal loads & indoor comfort
Schedules
Supply Systems

Envelope
The envelope measures are categorised by their building
performance year (BPY), and all the construction
standards are according to the Danish building regulations
(Bolig- og Planstyrelsen, u.d.). A BPY is defined based upon
the last renovation year, so if there is no renovation done
on the building, then the building construction year is
the BPY. An overview of the used thermal transmittance
(U-values) for the different categories is shown in Table
2, all the units for the thermal transmittance is given in
[W/m²K]. As shown, the buildings are categorized into
six main categories, considering the year of construction,
last renovated. This starts with buildings dated back
before 1920 to newly built or retrofitted buildings in 2020.

Typology, Internal loads, Schedules & Indoor
Comfort
The internal loads, schedules and indoor comfort are
related to the building typology. In this case study there
are five different typologies, and these are industry,
museums, offices, retail, schools, and single residents.
The specifications for the different typologies can be seen
in Table 3.

Supply Systems and HVAC
The heating supply system of Rise is majorly divided upon
the three largest categories from Figure 5, which will be
explained in the following section. Table 4 describes the
simplified distribution.
The HVAC system in Rise consists of heating, ventilation,
and hot water subsystems, while the cooling is neglected
and there are no controllers incorporated. An overview of
the HVAC system can be seen in Table 5.

WITHOUT GEOMETRY ALTERATIONS

WITH GEOMETRY ALTERATIONS

REAL ELECTRICITY
CONSUMPTION
[MWH/YR]

ELECTRICITY
CONSUMPTION [MWH/
YR]

DIFFERENCE WITH
RESPECT TO REAL
DATA [%]

ELECTRICITY
CONSUMPTION
[MWH/YR]

DIFFERENCE WITH
RESPECT TO REAL DATA
[%]

3408

4531

25

3624

6

Table 1 Comparison between the real consumption and the baseline scenario both with & without the alterations in building geometry.
STANDARDS

BPY

WINDOWS

ROOF

WALL_IN

WALL_OUT

BASE

Standard 1

<1920’s

3.5

0.5

0.7

1

0.6

Standard 2

1920 to 1960’s

3

0.47

0.65

1

0.5

Standard 3

1961’s to 1981’s

2.9

0.45

0.6

1

0.45

Standard 4

1982’s to 2005’s

2.9

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.3

Standard 5

2005’s to 2010’s

1.8

0.15

0.2

0.3

0.2

Standard 6

2015’s to 2020’s

1.5

0.15

0.2

0.2

0.2

Table 2 Various buildings categories with their corresponding thermal transmittance in W/m²K.

8

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

BUILDING
TYPOLOGY

MAX OCCUPANCY
[M2/PERSON]

LIGHTING LOAD
[W/M 2]

APPLIANCE LOAD
[W/M 2]

HEATING SETPOINT
[°C]

HEATING SETBACK
[°C]

Industrial

15

15

10

19

15

Museums

3

10.8

7

21

15

Offices

14

10

7

20

17

Retail

8

20

4

20

17

Schools

3

10

4

21

17

Single houses

10

10

8

21

18

Table 3 Specifications for the different typologies.

Figure 5 Different heating installation and sources provided by the BBR register.
DISTRIBUTION

PERCENTAGE

Covered by district heating

71

Central heating by oil

13

Heated by electrical heaters

16

Table 4 Overview of the simplified energy supply system distribution.

STANDARDS

BPY

HEATING

HOT WATER

VENTILATION

Standard 1

<1920’s

Radiator (90/70)

Medium temperature water (45/10)

Window ventilation

Standard 2

1920 to 1960’s

Radiator (90/70)

Medium temperature water (45/10)

Window ventilation

Standard 3

1961’s to 1981’s

Radiator (90/70)

Medium temperature water (45/10)

Window ventilation

Standard 4

1982’s to 2005’s

Radiator (70/55)

Medium temperature water (45/10)

Window ventilation

Standard 5

2005’s to 2010’s

Floor heating (40/35)

Medium temperature water (45/10)

Mechanical ventilation with demand
control

Standard 6

2015’s to 2020’s

Floor heating (40/35)

Medium temperature water (45/10)

Mechanical ventilation with demand
control

Table 5 The HVAC settings for the different building standards.

THE BASELINE SCENARIO
According to information from the BBR, Rise Fjernvarme,
and consumption data from Ærø, 238 buildings
have a heating demand in this area, and out of these
approximately 123 are supplied by the district heating
company (Rise Fjernvarme, 2019) (ÆRØ, 2020) (Bygningsog Boligregistret, 2018).
The approximate heating distribution and the energy
sources can be seen in Figure 5.

The historic consumption data indicates that the city
consumes approximately 3,408 [MWh/year] electricity
(ÆRØ, 2020), and the district heating company supplies
approximately 3500 [MWh/year], to the 123 buildings
which are connected to the district heating grid (Bygningsog Boligregistret, 2018). The simulations in CEA consist of
211 buildings and are divided, as seen in Figure 3, into two
categories. The grey buildings on the map are supplied by
central heating sources or electrical heating, and the red
ones use district heating.

9

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

BASELINE SCENARIO ENERGY RESULTS
As a first step before moving to energy improvement
measures implementation, the base case scenarios
performance of the Rise district needs to be simulated
and reported. On the holistic level, the baseline
simulations have shown that the city consumes 8515
MWh of heat and around 3624 MWh electricity per year.
In the following sections, these numbers will serve as
the reference values to evaluate different measures
and packages regarding energy improvements and
renovations. Figure 6 provides an overview about the
utilisation of heat and electricity.
In addition to the overall energy consumption
numbers for heating and electricity, CEA also simulates
the indoor air comfort conditions, mainly temperatures
and moisture content. Figure 7 shows the comfort charts
with indoor temperature and moisture levels for one of
the residential buildings selected in Rise. It is evident
that the building has an acceptable indoor comfort
conditions on average, however with notable lower
indoor temperatures in some periods of the year. This
may be due to the generally lower indoor temperatures

accepted in Danish buildings compared to other
countries.

ENERGY IMPROVEMENT MEASURES
After simulating the base case scenario of the Rise district,
multiple energy improvement measures and scenarios
will be investigated in this section aiming to improve the
overall energy performance of the district and reduce its
energy consumption. Such measures will deal with both
the building envelope and the energy systems design. For
example, the district heating system is currently supplied
by around 50% solar heating and 50% wood pellets,
which makes it an interesting case to investigate how a
decreasing heating consumption could lower the needed
wood pellet capacity. In the following sections, different
energy efficient measures and packages will be introduced
to enhance energy efficiently and lower the consumption.

Envelope Measures
According to the BBR-data, the average building
performance year for Rise is 1949, which means that the
typical building is quite old and generally not very energy

Figure 6 The heat consumption of the district with resources breakdown.

Figure 7 Comfort chart for the residential building B1020 in Rise with temperature and moisture levels.

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

10

efficient. Several measures were introduced regarding
the envelope, including upgrading windows, walls, floors,
and roofs. The standard values were changed in a way
that they comply with the BR18-regulation (Bygnings- og
Boligregistret, 2018), the latest Danish building regulation.
Even though, the district heating company would not have
that big of an influence on the inhabitants of these houses,
but it is assumed that most of the houses would anyway
undergo a renovation within the next decade. Table 6 shows
the upgraded values regarding the thermal transmittance
in case of envelope enhancement measures.

to the island, the PVT system has the benefit of surplus
heat production. Figure 8 shows the electricity & heat
production of the installations.

Supply System Measures
While the building envelope improvements are vital for
future energy efficient Rise district, the enhancement
and upgrade of the current energy systems into energy
efficient alternative units and renewable energy systems
is key towards attaining energy and environmental
goals of the island. Thus, another set of measures
targeting the improvement of the energy supply systems
were developed and assessed aiming to evaluate the
impact on the building energy performance and the
corresponding energy consumption profile. In terms of
lighting, the lighting capacity for the baseline scenario
ranges between 8 and 15 W/m2, depending on the
building typology. For the improved BR18 standards, this
is set to be 5 W/m2 which is assumed to be reached by
installing LED lights. In the measure called “HP”, heat
pumps (HP) replace all the individual boilers using oil and
wood in the district. This measure also ensures that the
energy mix of Rise is primarily renewable where fossil
fuels are phased out. Another measure called “100% DH”
connects all the buildings to the local district heating,
where no individual supply systems are allowed. Two
other measures include increasing the capacity of PV/
PVT to approx. 1 MW as part of the thermal and electrical
grid. While both systems will feed the electricity supply

Thermal transmittance
BR18 [W/m²K]

Energy Improvement Measure Results
The energy improvement measures listed above are
implemented and simulated one by one in CEA and
results regarding the overall electricity and heating
savings compared to the baseline scenario are shown
in Figure 9. As highlighted by the results, the envelope
measures can save up to 10% of the heating demand,
with very minimal impact on the electricity levels. The
lighting improvement measure on the other side saves
up to 36% of the electricity consumption.
On the other hand, the energy supply system
enhancement measures show very different results
depending on the measure implemented. While
the 100% district heating system measure allows
minimal heating savings of only 3%, the PVT systems
show promising results with reported heat savings
up to 35% in addition to 46% reduction on electricity
consumption. In addition, the heat pump measure can
reduce the heat consumption by 24% but increases the
electricity consumption by 27%. Hereby, the baseline
scenario numbers should be taken into consideration,
as heat consumption is more than twice the electricity
consumption, providing a larger potential for saving.
Therefore, measures allowing heating savings are highly
favourable in this case from a technical perspective.
Obviously, if an economic approach is implemented
in comparing different measures, the electricity and
hearing prices would determine he most optimal
measures to select.

Energy Improvement Packages
In actual real case energy retrofit process, it is generally a
collection or set of measures which are implemented in

WINDOWS

OUTSIDE WALLS

INSIDE WALLS

FLOOR ON GROUND

INTERNAL FLOORS

ROOF

1.8

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.5

0.2

Table 6 Thermal transmittance values for the envelope measures.

Figure 8 Overview of the PVT production, the left column in every month is the electricity [MWh] production and the right is heat
production [MWh].

11

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

Figure 9 Energy savings in Heat & Electricity consumption compared with the Baseline Scenario.
PACKAGE 1

PACKAGE 2

PACKAGE 3

PACKAGE 4

PACKAGE 5

PACKAGE 6

Windows
Walls
ROOF
Floor Base
Lights
HP
PV
PVT
100 % DH
Wind Turbine

Table 7 Overview of the different packages and corresponding measures.

a certain district rather than only one measure at a time.
Due to the dynamic nature of the measures, dynamic
energy simulation tools as CEA are valuable in this regard
to estimate and predict the impact of implementing
a group of measures at once. After simulating the
impact of each measure alone, the different measures
are collected in several energy improvement packages
to determine the impact on the building energy
performance. The packages were designed in a way that
all of them include the envelope changes, but the supply
system changes included were varied. Table 7 gives
an overview of the packages and their corresponding
measures.
To investigate if Rise could become a positive energy
district (PED), it was decided to investigate which

measures and energy sources have an impact on the
overall performance of the city.
Package 1 is chosen to investigate how energy
renovations could affect the total energy demand of
the different buildings. It only includes all improvements
dealing with the envelope. Packages 2, 3 and 4, are all
related to envelope improvements and then adding an
alternate heating source, with the following composition:
•
•
•

Package 2: Envelope + Heat Pump
Package 3: Envelope + Photovoltaics
Package 4: Envelope, HP + PVThermal

Package 5 connects all the buildings to the existing
district heating system, while Package 6 aims at adding

12

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

renewable energy systems sufficient to establish a
Positive Energy District.
•
•

Package 5: Envelope + 100% DH
Package 6: PED (Envelope, HP, PVT’s and Wind
turbines)

When investigating the possibility for a PED establishment,
Package 6 is built upon Package 4, which is the package
closest to the target, as it produces more heat than is
required by the district. To establish a PED, it was then
decided to install wind turbines in this scenario, where
the needed capacity to fulfil the remaining electricity
demand of about 2200 MWh was calculated as being
0.71 MW of wind power capacity. As the electricity is
produced by both PV’s and wind turbines, then it is
assumed that on a city located on an Island, it would be
feasible that one of the production units would be able
to always deliver the necessary power. However, if this is
not the case, then it would be relevant to investigate the
possibility to install a battery or have grid connection as
an option, as the grid of Ærø is primarily driven by carbon
neutral production units (Kommune, u.d.).

Package 1, where only the envelope improvement
measures are considered along with lighting system
upgrade, results in a heating consumption reduction of
17% and an electricity consumption reduction of around
35%. When different heating sources are added in the
packages, the heating consumption is reduced in the case
of all the packages, while the electricity consumption
is only reduced for four out of the five other packages
compared to Package 1. Package 2 with the heat
pumps obviously increases the electricity consumption
but was on the other side able to reduce the heating
consumption by around 85%. As a summary, Package 4
showed the most promising results with a reduction in
electricity consumption of 62% and a generation of extra
heating exceeding the district need by 20%. Thus, this
Package was used as a basis in establishing a Danish PED
by including the possibility of integrating a wind turbine
capacity. This has led to Package 6 saving 100% on the
electricity consumption and generating excess heating
as well. It is important to note here that the calculations
carried out and reported are on yearly net energy level.

DISCUSSION

Energy Packages Results
The six different energy improvement packages built
are implemented, one by one, in the CEA tool and the
performance of the Rise district was simulated and
reported in terms of heating and electricity consumption.
The results of each package implementation are
compared to the base case scenario to assess the savings.
Figure 10 gives an overview of the heating and electricity
consumption savings attained in the case of each package.

When reviewing the different packages along with
their impact on both the island heating and electricity
grids, Package 4 with the Envelope improvement, the
installation of individual heat pumps and the combined
PV and solar thermal units, has the highest influence
on the heating demand. This package could be a great
addition to the district heating network in Rise, as it
could lower the need for district heating both in the

Figure 10 Energy savings in heat & electricity consumption compared to the baseline scenario.

13

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

summer months where the sun is available, and then
it could also lower the demand in the winter months
with the usage of the heat pumps. One of the original
ideas was to investigate the establishment of a positive
energy district in Rise. Based on the analysis carried
out, such aim could not be realized without expanding
the wind turbine capacity supplying the district. As
an example, when installing the PV and PVT systems,
it was decided to install these on all the available
rooftops, allowing the reduction of 35% of the baseline
heating demand and 46 % of the baseline electricity
demand. Package 4 which includes PVT and a heat
pump, gets close with improvements of 85% heating
and 61 % electricity.
To establish a PED though, Package 6 was developed
with the addition of 0,7 MW of wind power capacity.
Since Ærø has already six 2 MW wind turbines, the
proposed addition of wind turbine capacity doesn’t
seem out of reach (Ærø Kommune, 2021). This would
transform Rise into a positive energy district and will be
a step forward towards a fossil fuel-free Ærø, as all the
energy is supplied by renewable sources such as wind,
sun or biomass. On the other hand, the investigation
carried out has several points which might be improved
in future work. One extension to the analysis from a
technical perspective would be the addition of battery
storage system. This was not included due to limitations
in the tool considered. However, a battery storage
system would aid in balancing the supply and demand
sides, especially that multiple renewable energy systems
are employed. Another improvement which could be
investigated in the future would be integrating more
wind power capacity and lowering the PV unit’s capacity
employed. This could be part of a holistic analysis on
the level of the whole island, rather than a small district
as Rise. In addition, the investigation and assessment
in this study didn’t take the economic perspective
into consideration, even though it has a big impact on
the decision making when upgrading the systems and
switching to alternative solutions. Thus, the impact
of the measures in this study has been reported only
employing a purely technical approach and considering
the impact on heating and electricity consumption
as indicators. On the other hand, while the economic
feasibility and payback period of upgrading the envelope
will not highlight this measure as a favourable measure,
the demands by the Danish building regulations in terms
of building envelope specifications is a major driver
towards the envelope upgrade as part of regulations
and standards compliance. As a summary, an overall
techno-economic approach needs to be implemented to
highlight the optimal measures for the energy scheme
improvement in the district and to aid future decisionmaking. This approach should also consider the latest
building regulations in Denmark as a key constraint and
baseline.

CONCLUSION
The building sector worldwide has a major contribution
in the overall energy consumption with at least 35%
share in the total energy and a similar contribution in
the corresponding greenhouse gas emissions. In light
of the energy and environmental goals and ambitions
in the majority of the countries, buildings and building
blocks are thus considered as a key component in the
national and international legislations and initiatives
aiming to reduce the energy consumption and the
corresponding emissions and achieve the energy
efficiency and environmental goals. When it comes to
energy consumption in buildings, Denmark is not an
exception. In the recent years, efforts in Denmark have
been devoted mainly towards enhancing the design and
operation of single buildings and facilities throughout an
expanding block of theoretical investigations, practical
applications and strict standards and legislations.
This work is one of the first initiatives towards scaling
up such efforts from single buildings performance
enhancement to design and performance evaluation
of energy efficient and positive energy districts and
cities. A case study of an island district is considered for
investigation with the aim to improve the overall energy
system design as well as the buildings performance as a
basis to establish the first Danish positive energy district.
City Energy Analyst (CEA), an urban scale modelling tool
is employed, and the considered district is modelled
including all specifications and characteristics. Then
the base case scenario of the district is simulated and
actual data on the heating and electricity consumption
are used for model calibration.
The calibrated model is then used as a baseline and
multiple energy improvement measures targeting
buildings envelope as well as the energy generation and
supply systems are developed and implemented in CEA
to report the impact on the overall energy consumption
for heating and electricity. Based on the investigated
measures, six improvement packages with measures
combinations were formed and simulated. It was shown
that a PED can be established in the considered district
through a holistic improvement energy package of
envelope-targeting measures, energy systems upgrades
and renewable energy systems expansion. The package
is made up of envelope insulation, LED lights, heat
pumps installation, PVT units and wind turbine capacity
expansion. This will allow satisfying the electricity needs
on an annual net level, while generating 20% more heat
in excess. The case study island considered in this work
has very ambitious energy and environmental goals, with
a well-established network of renewable energy systems
in place. The long-term goal in 2030 is to expand the
renewable energy systems capacity to become fossilfuel free. Thus, the findings of this study along with the
various scenarios developed and tested will serve as a

14

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

preliminary assessment and form a basis to aid future
decision-making in retrofitting the energy system and
upgrading the buildings envelope and services. A future
follow-up investigation would be combining the technical
approach employed in this study with an economic
approach to investigate the economic feasibility of the
scenarios developed and provide a better holistic picture
on the added value. In addition, the study forms a basis
for establishing the first PED in Denmark and is in line with
the recent EU strategy aiming towards the deployment
and replication of 100 Positive Energy Neighbourhoods in
Europe by 2025.

AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
Barbara Kristin Holmsund Jepsen
University of Southern Denmark, DK
Tom Walther Haut
University of Southern Denmark, DK
Muhyiddine Jradi
orcid.org/0000-0002-3039-1845
Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller Institute, University of Southern
Denmark, DK

REFERENCES
ÆRØ. 2020. Provided ÆRØ data. s.l.:s.n.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Ærø Kommune. 2021. Bæredygtig energi. [Online] Available
at: https://www.aeroekommune.dk/borger/energi-naturmiljoe-klima/baeredygtig-energi.

This work was carried out as part of the Danish
participation in ‘IEA EBC Annex 83 – Positive Energy
Districts’, no. 64020–1007, funded by the Danish Energy
Agency under the Energy Technology Development
and Demonstration Program (EUDP). The Agency
had no part in the design of the study and collection,
analysis, and interpretation of data and in writing the
manuscript.

Ali, U, et al. 2021. Review of urban building energy modeling
(UBEM) approaches, methods and tools using qualitative
and quantitative analysis, s.l.: Energy Build. 246: 111073.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2021.111073
Bolig- og, P. n. d. Bygningsreglementet. [Online] Available at:
https://bygningsreglementet.dk [Accessed August 2021].
Bruse, M, Nouvel, R, Wate, P, Kraut, V and Coors, V.
2015. CityGML ADE and its application for heating
demand calculation. International journal of 3-D

FUNDING INFORMATION

information modeling. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4018/
IJ3DIM.2015070104
Bygnings- og, B, 2018. BBR-oplysninger. [Online] Available at:

Funded by the Danish Energy Agency under the Energy
Technology Development and Demonstration Program
(EUDP) with the project Dansk deltagelse i IEA Annex 83
– Positive Energy Districts, no. 64020–1007.

https://bbr.dk/se-bbr-oplysninger [Accessed August 2021].
Climate One Building. n.d. Repository of free climate data for
building performance – Denmark. [Online] Available at:
http://climate.onebuilding.org/WMO_Region_6_Europe/
DNK_Denmark/index.html [Accessed August 2021].

COMPETING INTERESTS

Dakheel, JA, Pero,CD, Aste, N and Leonforte, F. 2020. Smart
buildings features and key performance indicators: A
review., s.l.: Sustainable Cities and Society. 61: 102328.

The authors have no competing interests to declare.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2020.102328
Delmastro, C, Mutani, G, Schranz, L and Vicentini, G. 2015.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

The role of urban form and socio-economic variables
for estimating the building energy savings potential at
the urban scale, s.l.: International Journal of Heat and

The authors contribution to the work is as follows:

Technology. 33: 91–100. DOI: https://doi.org/10.18280/
ijht.330412

•

•

•

Barbara Kristin Holmsund Jepsen: Investigation,
Formal Analysis, Resources, Software, Visualization,
Writing Original Draft
Tom Walther Haut: Investigation, Formal Analysis,
Resources, Software, Visualization, Writing Original
Draft
Muhyiddine Jradi: Conceptualization, Methodology,
Formal Analysis, Investigation, Writing Revised Draft,
Supervision, Project Administration

EC, A. 2018. Clean Planet for all: a European strategic longterm vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive
and climate neutral economy. COM (2018)
773-COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT, THE EUROPEAN COUNCIL, THE
COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL
COMMITTEE, THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS AND THE
EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK.
Eicker, U. 2019. Urban Energy Systems for Low-Carbon Cities.
s.l.:Academic Press.

Barbara Kristin Holmsund Jepsen and Tom Walther
Haut contributed equally to the work and the paper
development.

European Commission. 2019. 2050 Long Term Strategy,.
[Online] Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/clima/eu-action/
climate-strategies-targets/2050-long-term-strategy_en

15

Jepsen et al. Future Cities and Environment DOI: 10.5334/fce.146

European Union. 2021. Energy efficiency directive. [Online]

Kommune, Æ. n.d. Bæredygtig energi. [Online] Available at:

Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/topics/

https://www.aeroekommune.dk/borger/energi-natur-

energy-efficiency/targets-directive-and-rules/energy-

miljoe-klima/baeredygtig-energi [Accessed 09 27 21].

efficiency-directive_en [Accessed 29 09 21].
Fonseca, JA, Thomas, D, Willmann, A, Elesawy, A and

Li, X and Wen, J. 2014. Review of building energy modeling
for control and operation. s.l.: Renewable and Sustainable

Schlueter, A. 2016. The City Energy Analyst Toolbox.

Energy Reviews 37: 517–537. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

[Online] Available at: https://doi.org/10.3929/

rser.2014.05.056

ethz-a-010690828 [Accessed 2021].
Gassar, AAA and Cha, C. 2020. Energy prediction techniques

Li, Z, Quan, SJ and Yang, PP-J. 2016. Energy performance
simulation for planning a low carbon neighborhood

for large-scale buildings towards a sustainable built

urban district: A case study in the city of Macau. Habitat

environment: a review, s.l.: Energy Build. 224: 110–238.

International, 53: 206–214. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2020.110238
HOK. 2016. Energy Modelling Payback Period. [Online] Available

habitatint.2015.11.010
Lindholm O, Rehman, H and Reda, F. 2021. Positioning

at: https://www.hok.com/about/news/2016/05/26/hok-

Positive Energy Districts in European Cities. DOI: https://doi.

case-studies-reveal-short-payback-of-energy-modeling.

org/10.3390/buildings11010019

Jepsen, B, Haut, T and Jradi, M. 2020. Towards energy efficient

Monti, A, Pesch, D, Ellis, K and Mancarella, P. 2016. Energy

planning of Danish cities and neighbourhoods, s.l.: 34th

Positive Neighborhoods and Smart Energy Districts: Methods,

International Conference on Efficiency, Cost, Optimization,

Tools, and Experiences from the Field. s.l.:Academic Press.

Simulation and Environmental Impact of Energy Systems
(ECOS 2021), June 28 – July 2, 2021, Taormina, Sicily,
Italy. https://portal.findresearcher.sdu.dk/en/publications/

Planet, D-GfRaIC. 2020. Proposed Mission: 100 Climate-neutral
Cities by 2030 – by and for the Citizens.
Rise, F. 2019. Værket – Rise Fjernvarme. [Online] Available

towards-energy-efficient-planning-of-danish-cities-and-

at: http://www.risefjernvarme.dk/om-vaerket/fakta-om-

neighbourh.

vaerket [Accessed August 2021].

Jradi, M, Arendt, K, Sangogboye, FC, Mattera, CG Markoska,
E., Kjærgaard, MB, Veje, CT and Jørgensen, BN. 2018.

Shi, ZF. 2017. A review for simulation-based urban form
generation and optimization modeling for energy-driven

ObepME: an online building energy performance monitoring

urban design at the district scale. Building and Environment,

and evaluation tool to reduce energy performance

121. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.05.006

gaps. s.l.: Energy Build. 166: 196–209. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.02.005
Jradi, M, Veje, C and Jørgensen, B. 2018. A dynamic energy
performance-driven approach for assessment of
building energy renovation – Danish case studies. s.l.:

Sola, A, Corchero, C, Salom, J and Sanmarti, M. 2020. Multidomain urban-scale energy modelling tools: A review,.
Sustainable Cities and Society, 54. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scs.2019.101872
The A/S Group – ETH Zurich. n.d. CEA – About us. [Online]

Energy Build. 158: 62–76. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.

Available at: https://cityenergyanalyst.com/history

enbuild.2017.09.094

[Accessed August 2021].

TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Jepsen, BKH, Haut, TW, Jradi, M. 2022. Design, Modelling and Performance Evaluation of a Positive Energy District in a Danish Island.
Future Cities and Environment, 8(1): 1, 1–15. DOI: https://doi.org/10.5334/fce.146
Submitted: 30 November 2021

Accepted: 24 January 2022

Published: 03 February 2022

COPYRIGHT:
© 2022 The Author(s). This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CC-BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author and source are credited. See http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Future Cities and Environment is a peer-reviewed open access journal published by Ubiquity Press.

