buildings
Article

E-Mobility in Positive Energy Districts
Tony Castillo-Calzadilla * , Ainhoa Alonso-Vicario

, Cruz E. Borges

and Cristina Martin

Institute of Technology, Faculty of Engineering, University of Deusto, Av. Universidades, 24, 48007 Bilbao, Spain;
ainhoa.alonso@deusto.es (A.A.-V.); cruz.borges@deusto.es (C.E.B.); cristina.andonegui@deusto.es (C.M.)
* Correspondence: tonycastillo@deusto.es; Tel.: +34-667895980

Abstract: A rise in the number of EVs (electric vehicles) in Europe is putting pressure on power
grids. At an urban scale, Positive Energy Districts (PEDs) are devised as archetypes of (small) urban
districts managing a set of interconnected buildings and district elements (lighting system, vehicles,
smart grid, etc.). This paper offers a comprehensive analysis of the impact of e-mobility in a PED,
simulated using MATLAB-Simulink software. The PED, a small district in northern Spain, is assessed
in five scenarios representing varying requirements in terms of energy efficiency of buildings, type
of street lighting and number of EVs. The results suggest that the energy rating of the buildings
(ranging from A for the most efficient to E) conditions the annual energy balance. A PED with six
interconnected buildings (3 residential and 3 of public use) and 405 EVs (as a baseline) only achieves
positivity when the buildings have a high energy rating (certificate A or B). In the most efficient case
(A-rated buildings), simulation results show that the PED can support 695 EVs; in other words, it can
provide nearly 9 million green kilometres. This result represents a potential 71% saving in carbon
emissions from e-mobility alone (as compared to the use of fossil-fuel vehicles), thus contributing a
reduction in the carbon footprint of the district and the city as a whole.


Citation: Castillo-Calzadilla, T.;

Keywords: e-mobility; green-mobility; positive energy district; renewable energy sources (RES);
building energy performance; energy efficiency; energy storage systems

Alonso-Vicario, A.; Borges, C.E.;
Martin, C. E-Mobility in Positive
Energy Districts. Buildings 2022, 12,
264. https://doi.org/10.3390/

1. Introduction

buildings12030264

In the long fight against climate change, one of the most pressing issues that needs
to be tackled to make cities more sustainable and eco-friendly is mobility; in 2018, road
transport accounted for 15% of total CO2 emissions, at 8.26 Gt [1], coming a close third to
electricity and heating [2]. Replacing the highly polluting fossil-fuel transport sector with
the new paradigm of electrified transport, with the introduction of EVs (electric vehicles),
is now one of the clear strategies of the European Union and offers a satisfactory solution
for attaining climate neutrality, since it would significantly reduce the use of fossil fuels [3].
However, a major increase in the number of EVs would significantly impact the electrical
sector, possibly requiring resizing of the utility grid [4].
The roll-out of e-mobility is expected to drive a rise in demand for electricity. In
California, for example, an increase of about 50% in demand (from 280 TWh to 420 TWh) is
forecast by 2045 as a result of the electrification of demand, particularly in e-mobility (EVs).
This will be accompanied by increased power production from renewables (photovoltaic,
wind, geothermal, biomass, etc.) [5]. The move to e-mobility has the backing of the
International Energy Agency’s Net Zero by 2050 Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector [6],
which envisages a major increase in uptake in EVs from a current figure of 5% of sales to
60% by 2040. This report is closely in line with other EU proposals.
The introduction of EVs offers greater flexibility, since they can be used to store energy
surpluses in order to flatten the surge caused in hours of highest energy demand [7]. Smart
charging hubs are easily integrable in cities [8]. They function not only as a load, using
electricity to recharge batteries, but also as a means of levelling out or reinforcing electricity
demand during certain time periods when the capacity of the storage system is exceeded

Academic Editors: Jian Zuo,
Hanliang Fu, Zezhou Wu, Tao Wang
and Audrius Banaitis
Received: 21 December 2021
Accepted: 21 February 2022
Published: 24 February 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

Buildings 2022, 12, 264. https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings12030264

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

2 of 15

or when power from the grid is more expensive [9]. Some research also suggests that
the use of smart EV-charging hubs would greatly reduce the cost of reinforcing electricity
distribution grids [10] within the low-carbon transition roadmap.
It is important to get to know the demand pattern of EVs [11] and each of the factors
that condition the curve of charge, including the voltage level of the charging hubs as well
as the number of EVs that are connected to a single charging station. The distribution of
the EV demand can be described by probabilistic models [12] that consider several spatialtemporal variables to understand not only the travel patterns of a certain population but
also social and demographic attributes. In this respect, the usage of charging infrastructure
at residential locations (in a very distributed manner) can have a real impact on the entire
infrastructure. Other modelling proposals use a Rule-based Energy Management System
(REMS) [13] to implement an intelligent control strategy that decides whether the energy
surpluses are stored in an Energy Storage Unit or sold to the grid depending on the most
convenient economic strategy. A recursive challenge for the optimisation of energy storage
systems has to do with dynamic management of demand. A demand response (DR) model
has been proposed [14] to characterise the usage of a set of 9 chargers that represent different
characteristics in terms of power and charging speeds. The model reproduces the DR of the
charging system to the EVs, keeping track of successful charging events and comparing
various scenarios of charging configuration. The study concludes that DR models allow
reducing the maximum available charging power.
When a DR approach is implemented, EVs play a key role in increasing the flexibility of
microgrids [5,14], contributing to relieving fluctuations in renewable energy generation [15].
For example, a Swedish case study [16] provides a comparison between distributed and
centralised charging approaches to determine optimal EV charging schedules, with the aim
of increasing photovoltaic (PV) self-consumption and reducing peak loads. An optimal
PV-EV sizing framework [17] is presented for solar powered charging stations, considering
load matching performances. The study’s findings show that self-consumption is improved
when community level strategies are taken into consideration. In this regard, recent
contributions [14,18,19] stress the importance of evaluating the impact of EVs at district
or city level. It is also recognisable the effect of environmental variables at the charging
speed of batteries. In this sense, regression models [11] can be used to understand the effect
of certain operational variables (daytime, season of the year and peak demand hours) in
the charging speed, which can drop by up to 10%. While the power curves generated by
EVs’ demand have been largely analysed, their effect in terms of energy balances is still
under study.
The precise definition of a Positive Energy District (PED) is still being decided on; [20],
for example, states that a “PED is seen as a district with annual net zero energy import, and
net zero CO2 emission working towards an annual local surplus production of renewable
energy”, whereas [21] defines PEDs as “energy-efficient and energy-flexible urban areas
or groups of connected buildings which produce net zero greenhouse gas emissions and
actively manage an annual local or regional surplus production of renewable energy. They
require integration of different systems and infrastructures and interaction between buildings, the users and the regional energy, mobility and ICT (Internet and Communications
tools) systems, while securing the energy supply and a good life for all in line with social,
economic and environmental sustainability”. The concept of the PED introduces options
such as energy efficiency and energy balances at a district scale and, therefore, includes
district elements such as e-mobility (electric bikes, cars and buses [22]). In broad terms,
a PED is defined as a district that produces more energy than required to meet its own
energy demands [23].
The concept of PED is directly connected to the analysis of annual (or monthly)
energy balances. However, few studies analyse energy balances at the building or district
level [24,25]. In the case of building-level, the energy balance is bounded to the energy
performance of the building and this is a consequence of the thermal isolation profile
and the efficiency of equipment. An analyses conducted in France [26], where three out

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

3 of 15

four quarters of the electricity is provided by nuclear power plants, shows that the heat
pump is the most preferable heating solution. The research revealed that new eco-friendly
buildings (passive houses) have a higher performance than renovated buildings [26].
Simulation based analysis would facilitate the evaluation of different options for old
or retrofitted buildings (inclusion of PV, geothermal, etc.) and their difference in terms of
energy performance with new buildings.
At a districts-level, some analyses are focused on the analysis of primary energy
factors, while they neglect the connectivity with the utility grid [24]. Indeed, the PED
concept has a higher economic net present value (NPV) than solely buying electricity from
the grid [24] and this can be noticed at different geographical distribution of charges (both
urban and rural neighbourhoods). A simulation analysis of PV technology shows that NPV
can increase from 29% to 31% and from 25% to 27% depending on household characteristics
when optimising ESS. Indeed, optimising the ESS performance is clue not only in terms of
economic performance [24] but also when trying to improve the autonomy of the area [25].
Improving the distribution rates among buildings generally implies important changes in
the topological configuration of the network, but facilitates a shared use of RES and can
support the exchange (import/export) of energy outside the PED boundaries [20]. A study
undertaken in European countries [27] is clear with respect to energy performance, and
after assessing 8 cities they conclude that districts with a population density over 200 in/ha
in northern Europe would not achieve energy balance results required by Net Zero Energy
Districts (NZED).
Concepts such as a Positive Energy District (PED) or Net Zero Energy District (NZED)
are connected to self-sufficiency and, therefore, to the adoption of local generation models [28]. The insertion of RES is a promising solution, but seasonal patterns should be
considered [29,30] and connected (as much as possible) with the seasonal demand. The
mismatch between the local generation and demand is generally overcome by hybridizing
the systems [30] and alleviated by automatic control systems [31]. It can also be managed by
physical storage systems [32] as in a case analysis in Finland where a heat recovery/excess
produced during summer is accumulated and used during winter. Analysing district
possibilities in terms of self-sufficiency or as energy providers (following a PED concept) is
a very new area of research that should be encompassed by in-field analysis [28] as well as
more theoretical studies or simulation-based exploratory studies.
Energy modelling at a PED scale is a new area of research and only a small number of
publications are so far available in the field. Some cutting-edge analysis [25] assesses the
self-sufficiency of an urban area (district) by examining four test scenarios with varying
percentages of PV (ranging from 30% to 50% of the total area), with and without an energy
storage system (ESS). This research suggests that ESSs guarantee higher rates of energy
distribution among virtually or physically connected buildings, with an impact of nearly
10–15% compared to the production-only scenario (i.e., without ESS). Another model-based
analysis [25] makes a set of simulations to analyse monthly and annual energy balances
at a PED scale, using the energy rating of the buildings as the determining factor. The
results appear to confirm that it is feasible to build a PED integrating RES provided that
only high-efficiency buildings are included. When moving to the district level, or analysing
a set of interconnected buildings, it is important to examine qualitative aspects [33] such
as a shortage of professionals, lack of public knowledge, or insufficient governmental and
institutional support. Other challenges to be overcome include economic and financial
feasibility, and other legal, regulatory, environmental and cultural/social aspects [34].
Holistic studies that combine quantitative and qualitative methods may be of help when
it comes to communication with the various stakeholders and can, for example, provide
evidence to support the introduction of PEDs as a central concept in urban action plans [25].
The literature review shows a clear research gap between the analysis of energy
performance at a building or district level and the analysis of EVs’ energy demand and
charging infrastructure. We have not found a simulation-based analysis where the district
is defined not only as a set of buildings, but also including other urban elements, such as

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

The literature review shows a clear research gap between the analysis of energy per‐
formance at a building or district level and the analysis of EVs’ energy demand and charg‐
ing infrastructure. We have not found a simulation‐based analysis where the district
4 ofis15
defined not only as a set of buildings, but also including other urban elements, such as the
lighting system or the EVs. The main research gap filled by this article is, therefore, the
completion
a quantitative
simulation‐based
analysis
assessing
thearticle
impact
e‐mobility
the lightingofsystem
or the EVs.
The main research
gap filled
by this
is,oftherefore,
the
incompletion
PEDs. Thisofresearch
definessimulation-based
a PED archetypeanalysis
or PED assessing
model bythe
assessing
capacity
a quantitative
impactthe
of e-mobility
ofinenergy
balances
to support
The case
study
represents
an urban
area inof
PEDs. This
research
defines ae‐mobility.
PED archetype
or PED
model
by assessing
the capacity
northern
Spain
that
shares
characteristics
with
many
European
cities.
This
makes
the re‐
energy balances to support e-mobility. The case study represents an urban area in northern
sults
easy
to
apply
to
areas
with
similar
climate
conditions.
The
main
limitations
thisto
Spain that shares characteristics with many European cities. This makes the resultsof
easy
study
analysis
theconditions.
distribution
ofmain
charges
among multiple
ESS include
units.
applyinclude
to areasthe
with
similarabout
climate
The
limitations
of this study
Additionally,
the
inclusion
of
the
Vehicle2Grid
concept
is
not
considered.
the analysis about the distribution of charges among multiple ESS units. Additionally, the
The paper
divided into concept
four main
sections.
Section 2 (Material and Methods) pre‐
inclusion
of theisVehicle2Grid
is not
considered.
sents the
design
of
the
simulation
environment,
the
and corresponding
references,
The paper is divided into four main sections.data,
Section
2 (Material and
Methods)
aspresents
well asthe
thedesign
methodology
used
to
assess
the
PED
to
enable
replicability
of
the
experi‐
of the simulation environment, the data, and corresponding references,
ments.
3 sets out the used
results
the simulation
provides
a comparative
analysis
as wellSection
as the methodology
to of
assess
the PED to and
enable
replicability
of the experiments.
inSection
terms 3ofsets
energy
balances
carbon
footprint.
Section 4a offers
a critical
analysis
that
out the
results and
of the
simulation
and provides
comparative
analysis
in terms
enables
ourbalances
results toand
be carbon
related footprint.
to other recent
studies.
Finally,
Section
5 sets
outenables
the main
of energy
Section
4 offers
a critical
analysis
that
our
conclusions
and
requirements
for
future
research.
results to be related to other recent studies. Finally, Section 5 sets out the main conclusions
and requirements for future research.
2. Material and Methods
2. Material
and presents
Methodsall the aspects taken into consideration in building the simula‐
This section
This section presents
allarchetype
the aspectsrepresents
taken intoan
consideration
in building
the simulation
tion environment.
The PED
urban district
in northern
Spain. It
environment.
The
PED
archetype
represents
an
urban
district
in
northern
Spain.
therefore
therefore uses irradiance values for an oceanic climate and Spanish parameters ofItbuilding
uses
irradiance
values
for
an
oceanic
climate
and
Spanish
parameters
of
building
efficiency
efficiency rates, building usage, energy consumption patterns, number of vehicles, etc.
rates, building usage, energy consumption patterns, number of vehicles, etc.
2.1. Data Used and Case Study
2.1. Data Used and Case Study
2.1.1. Data Used in the Simulation
2.1.1. Data Used in the Simulation
The irradiation patterns were collected from the PVGIS database, from which we
The irradiation patterns were collected from the PVGIS database, from which we
have extracted the profiles for an oceanic climate in northern Spain [35]. Figure 1 shows
have extracted the profiles for an oceanic climate in northern Spain [35]. Figure 1 shows
the
solar generation capacity of the area in which the district is located. The months of
the solar generation capacity of the area in which the district is located. The months
greatest
irradiance
are April
to August
(Figure
1), with
maximum
irradiance
values
of
of greatest
irradiance
are April
to August
(Figure
1), with
maximum
irradiance
values
around
70%,
using
Standard
Test
Conditions
(STCs)
for
PV
facilities
(Air
mass
=
1.5,
Tem‐
of around 70%, using Standard Test Conditions (STCs) for PV facilities (Air mass = 1.5,
2). It is clear from Figure 1 that the month
perature
= 25 °C,
= 1000=Wh/m
2 ). It is clear from Figure 1 that the
◦ C,Irradiance
Temperature
= 25and
and Irradiance
1000 Wh/m
with
the
greatest
irradiance
in
Bilbao
is
May,
with
a
peak
13:00 and
15:00.
month with the greatest irradiance in Bilbao is May, withbetween
a peak between
13:00
and 15:00.

Figure 1. Heat map of the location of the PED.

2.1.2. Case Study Used for the Experimentation
This study defines a PED archetype that includes: (a) six facilities, three entirely new
residential buildings, and three renovated public buildings [25]; (b) a smart grid han-

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

5 of 15

dling the energy provided by PV panels (monocrystalline technology); (c) electrochemical
(Li-Ion) energy storage systems (ESSs) based on a communitarian (centralised) dispatch;
(d) EVs (electric vehicles); and (e) smart lighting systems and other communication and
sensing services.
2.1.3. Electricity Consumption Profiles of Buildings
We consider a total of six buildings, three for residential use (RU), and three for public
use (PU)—i.e., universities, offices, museums, etc. The buildings are assumed to vary in size
and, therefore, have different levels of consumption. In each case, they are designated as B1,
B2, B3 (Building 1, Building 2, and Building 3). Daily patterns of electricity consumption
were obtained from Red Eléctrica Española (REE), implementing the coefficients for the
two types of building [36].
2.1.4. Thermal Energy Demand of Buildings
The heating system operates only during the winter months (120 days, from December
to March) with fixed hours of 17:00–24:00 for residential buildings and 07:00–16:00 for
public-use buildings. The energy efficiency of the buildings is based on the efficiency
performance featurisation of the Spanish Public Agency Instituto para la Diversificación y
Ahorro de la Energía (IDAE) [37], corresponding to Article 7 of the Energy Performance of
Buildings Directive (EPBD, Directive 2010/31/EU) [38].
2.1.5. Experimental Assumptions for the Case of Use
Electric-mobility consumption is based on the charge curve of the Volkswagen ID3 [39],
which is considered to be an average European EV. The average trajectory of a car (aged
under 4 years) in Spain is about 12,947 km/year [40], and average EV energy consumption
is 13 kWh per 100 km [41]. We assume an average of 50–60 households per building and,
therefore, a total of 405 EVs in the PED.
Figure 2 shows the electricity demand of residential-use (RU) buildings (at the top),
where two peaks can be identified; the electricity demand of public-use (PU) buildings,
with a relatively even demand in the central hours of the day; and energy generation from
PV technology with a clear peak at around 14:00. There therefore appears to be a match
between the combined demand peaks of residential and service buildings and the peak in
generation from the PV system. The amount of PV energy available is strongly conditioned
by the efficiency of the PV modules. Figure 2 shows the total energy available from the roof
of one building (500 m2 ), which represents the solar profile of the city without taking into
account the efficiency of the PV modules. This is input data, to which the simulation tool
applies the efficiency rate of the PV technology (16%, see Section 2.2).
2.2. Simulation Tool
The PED model has been developed in MATLAB-SIMULINK, release 2021a, which
mimics generation and consumption energy profiles in the PED, modelled by using daily
electricity profiles based on an hourly scheme. Figure 3 shows the elements of the PED,
namely: 6 buildings with 6 rooftop solar arrays (PV, 500 m2 each), 1 network of geothermal
rings for the PED (heat pump based), 12 EV charging points as baseline and 1 auxiliary
system or ESS. All elements of the PED (such as the photovoltaic array, ESS, and EV) are
connected via a 240 V/50 Hz bus. The PED model is shown in Figure 3. The different
systems considered are as follows:

•
•

•

The PV arrays cover the rooftops of the buildings, giving a total surface of 3000 m2 .
The Monocrystalline Silicon technology employed provides an efficiency of 16%.
The low temperature geothermal network is made up of 3 interconnected rings. The
thermal heat is transformed into electricity by means of a set of 2 heat pumps with a
COP (coefficient of performance) of 4.7.
The district is considered to have 20 smart lighting units of 250 W/unit in the case of
traditional lamps and 50 W/unit for LEDs.

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

6 of 15

•

Buildings 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW

•

The EV charging infrastructure utilises the 2.3 kW rated power charger [42] generally
used in residential installations. Depending on the number of EVs simulated, we
assume charger hubs of 28 kW (12 charging points) or 48 kW (21 charging points).
6 of 16
Public transport and public-use chargers are not considered in this analysis.
The Energy Storage System (ESS) uses an ancillary system with an installed capacity
of 252 kW.

Figure 2. Daily consumption pattern of the buildings, and pattern of PV generation: (a) Top: conFigure
2. Dailypattern
consumption
pattern of the
buildings,
and
PV generation:
(a) Top:
con‐ or
sumption
of residential-use
(RU)
buildings;
(b)pattern
Centre:ofconsumption
pattern
of service
sumption pattern of residential‐use (RU) buildings; (b) Centre: consumption pattern of service or
public-use (PU) buildings; (c) Bottom; daily PV generation pattern (one day per month).
public‐use (PU) buildings; (c) Bottom; daily PV generation pattern (one day per month).

2.3. Methodology Applied in the Evaluation
2.2. Simulation
Tool
The methodology
used to measure the impact of e-mobility on urban areas in a PED

The PEDconsists
model has
been developed
in MATLAB‐SIMULINK,
release
2021a,
which
approach
of considering
all demand
and local RES generation.
Based
on the
district
mimics
generation
and consumption
energy
profiles
the PED,
using daily
structure
and operational
conditions
(in terms
ofin
number
of modelled
residents, by
economic
activity,
electricity
profiles
based
on405
an EVs
hourly
scheme. Figure
3 showstothe
elements
of the PED,
services
provided,
etc.),
are assumed
to be sufficient
satisfy
the district’s
mobility
2
namely:
6 buildings
6 rooftop
solar arrays
(PV, the
500confines
m each),of1the
network
of geothermal
requirements.
Aswith
the energy
is produced
within
PED, the
charging point
rings
the PEDto(heat
pump based), 12 EV charging points as baseline and 1 auxiliary
is for
considered
be residential.
system orThe
ESS.
All elements
of the PED
(suchout
as the
photovoltaic
array,
ESS, and
are
electrical
assessment
is carried
using
Ohm’s law.
Demand
and EV)
generation
are then
calculated
inHz
terms
power
P shown
= V2 /R.inTo
evaluate
thedifferent
positivity
of the
connected
via
a 240 V/50
bus.ofThe
PED(watts),
model is
Figure
3. The
sys‐
the most
suitable
temsdistrict,
considered
are as
follows:option is to use Kirchhoff’s Law for the nodes (currents), as in
(1) below.
 Equation
The PV arrays
cover the rooftops of the buildings, giving a total surface of 3000 m2.
6
I i + IEVemployed
= IUG + Iprovides
(1)
The Monocrystalline Silicon∑technology
PV + IESSan efficiency of 16%.
i =1 L
 where:
The low temperature geothermal network is made up of 3 interconnected rings. The
thermal heat is transformed into electricity by means of a set of 2 heat pumps with a
ILi —the consumption of each of the 6 buildings that compose the PED
COP (coefficient of performance) of 4.7.
IUG —the current drawn from the utility grid

The district is considered to have 20 smart lighting units of 250 W/unit in the case of
IPV —the photovoltaic current generated
traditional lamps and 50 W/unit for LEDs.
IESS —the current of the ESS

The EV charging infrastructure utilises the 2.3 kW rated power charger [42] generally
IEV —the current demanded by the EV charging port
used in residential installations. Depending on the number of EVs simulated, we as‐
sume charger hubs of 28 kW (12 charging points) or 48 kW (21 charging points). Pub‐
lic transport and public‐use chargers are not considered in this analysis.

The Energy Storage System (ESS) uses an ancillary system with an installed capacity
of 252 kW.

Buildings
FOR PEER REVIEW
Buildings2022,
2022,12,
12,x264

7 of
7 of1615

Figure3.3.Main
Mainelements
elementsconsidered
consideredininPED
PEDsimulation
simulationmodel.
model.
Figure

3. Results
2.3. Methodology Applied in the Evaluation
The results present monthly and annual energy balances of a PED archetype, where
The methodology
used
to measure
the impact
of e‐mobility
on urban
areasdistricts
in a PEDin
archetype
is defined as
a PED
model that
can represent
many (small)
urban
approach
consists
of considering
all demand
and local
RESofgeneration.
Based onbuildings
the dis‐
Europe. In
this case,
the PED archetype
comprises
a set
six interconnected
trict
structure
and
operational
conditions
(in
terms
of
number
of
residents,
economic
ac‐
sharing district infrastructures, such as smart lighting and e-mobility chargers. The energy
tivity,
services
provided,
etc.),
405
EVs
are
assumed
to
be
sufficient
to
satisfy
the
district’s
balances of this PED archetype are assessed in five scenarios. In terms of renewable
mobility
requirements.
As the
energy
produced
within
the confines
of the PED,
the
energy generation,
the PED
consists
ofisthermal
energy
produced
by a geothermal
system
charging
point
is
considered
to
be
residential.
and electricity energy produced by PV modules. The geothermal energy generation is
The electrical
assessment
carried out
using
Ohm’s law. Demand
and generation
considered
to be constant
andisgenerated
from
low-temperature
geothermal
rings using
2/R. To evaluate the positivity of the2
are
in terms
ofof
power
(watts),
P = Vcovers
twothen
heatcalculated
pumps with
a COP
4.7. The
PV array
a total surface area of 3000 m
district,
the most suitable
option
use Kirchhoff’s
Lawgeothermal
for the nodes
(currents),
as inis
on South-oriented
roofs with
a 30is◦ to
inclination.
While the
energy
generation
Equation
(1)
below.
always available and depends only on the demand pattern, the PV generation follows a
clear daily pattern that varies according to the season of the year (see Figure 2).
𝐼
𝐼 five𝐼 scenarios
𝐼
The energy requirements vary𝐼 across
the
representing buildings(1)of
different energy ratings, the use of conventional or smart lighting systems (20 lamp units)
where:
and the addition of different numbers of EVs. In this regard, we use a fleet of 405 EVs as a
𝐼test-bed
—the consumption
each
of proves
the 6 buildings
compose
thebalance,
PED we use that energy
simulation; ifofthe
PED
to have a that
positive
energy
IUG
—the
current
drawn
from
the
utility
grid
surplus to charge extra EVs, thus exporting energy out of the PED in the form of green
IPV
—the photovoltaic
current
generated
kilometres.
This analysis
allows
PEDs to be assessed not only in terms of self-consumption,
IESS
—the
current
of
the
ESS
but also as energy providers to other areas of the city.
IEV—the
current
demanded
by the EV
charging
Table
1 shows
the simulation
results.
Each port
column contains information on the principal characteristics of the scenario in question: energy efficiency of buildings; inclusion of
3.RES;
Results
number of EVs supported, etc. It also presents the simulation results of energy balances
(kWh)
andpresent
total emissions
(tonnes
CO2 eq)
on an annual
basis.
The simulation
The
results
monthly saved
and annual
energy
balances
of a PED
archetype,
where
analysis uses
a varying
energy
rating
(BER), where
A represents
the districts
best energy
archetype
is defined
as abuilding
PED model
that
can represent
many
(small) urban
in
performance
and
E the
(the bettercomprises
the performance,
efficient thebuildings
building).
Europe.
In this
case,
thepoorest
PED archetype
a set ofthe
sixmore
interconnected
Annualdistrict
energyinfrastructures,
balances are given
the number
of EVs supported
by the
PED
sharing
suchtogether
as smartwith
lighting
and e‐mobility
chargers. The
energy
and
the
carbon
emissions
saved
through
the
use
of
e-mobility
or
the
integration
of
RES.
balances of this PED archetype are assessed in five scenarios. In terms of renewable energy
The
provision
of
EVs
avoids
the
use
of
other
fuels
(petrol
and
diesel).
Thus,
the
more
EVs
generation, the PED consists of thermal energy produced by a geothermal system and
in the district, the more the carbon footprint is reduced. Similarly, the integration of RES

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

8 of 15

(geothermal and photovoltaic generation) is compared with the consumption of natural
gas for thermal energy and the use of the utility grid for electricity, in order to analyse the
potential of the PED to reduce the carbon footprint.
Table 1. Results of experimental scenarios for the modelled PED.

Scenario

RES
with
ESS

PED

1
2
3
4
5

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
Yes
Yes

Lighting

Energy
Label

Conventional
Conventional
LED
LED
LED

E
D
C
B
A

EVs (#)

Annual
Balance
(kWh)

Emissions
Saved by
E-Mobility
(Tonnes of
CO2 eq)

Emissions
Saved by Use
of RES
(Tonnes of
CO2 eq)

Total Emissions
Saved (Tonnes
of CO2 eq)

405
405
405
550
695

−7652.83
−6217.80
−4191.88
141.43
2670.94

12,855
12,855
12,855
17,450
22,044

13,717
11,921
9816
3945
349

26,573
24,777
22,673
21,396
22,393

The results of the simulation highlight the fact that the overall energy balance of the
district is conditional on the energy rating of the buildings. As expected, Scenario 1 presents
the poorest energy performance, with a negative annual energy balance of −7652 kWh.
This scenario represents a building stock that was built more than 50 years ago and was,
therefore, not designed with any energy efficiency criteria. In Spain, more than six million
buildings (out of a total of twenty-five million) have an energy certification of between D
and G [43]. Scenario 2 (Building Energy Rating D) shows a 13% improvement in overall
annual energy balance compared to Scenario 1. In terms of mobility, the number of EVs
remains the same and, consequently, the savings in emissions (12,855 tonnes of CO2 eq)
is also the same (compared to a scenario in which vehicles run on diesel). However, the
emissions saved by the use of RES are smaller, since less thermal energy is needed than
in Scenario 1 and, therefore, this situation (Scenario 2) represents a district with reduced
consumption and a lower potential for emissions reduction than when natural gas is used.
Moving to Scenario 3, where the buildings have a better energy rating, the annual energy
balance is still negative but there is a 17% improvement on Scenario 2. This is mainly due
to the energy rating of the buildings (C), given that the inclusion of LEDs cuts only about
0.53% of total annual energy demand. The effect of energy efficiency in buildings is clear,
and only Scenarios 4 and 5 have a positive annual balance. This energy surplus is mainly
used to support more EVs and, therefore, to increase the district’s capacity to supply the
city with green kilometres. Indeed, improving the BER from B to A (Scenarios 4 and 5)
results in a significant increase in the number of EVs (over 20%, from 550 to 695), with a
subsequent reduction in carbon emissions from mobility of around 4600 tonnes of CO2 eq
(a 20% reduction).
The last scenario, Scenario 5 (A-rated buildings) characterises a district where buildings are well oriented and designed, are fully insulated on both facades and roofs, and
actively and passively make use of high-performance installations and renewable energies.
In this case, the potential for CO2 eq savings from the use of RES is very low (349 tonnes
of CO2 eq /year) since the buildings can be characterised as having near-zero energy
consumption—in other words, the PED is a near-passive district. This low potential for
carbon reduction through RES use is made up for by a high potential for carbon reduction
in mobility. Indeed, the energy savings of 2530 kWh in Scenario 5, as compared to Scenario
4, would increase the district’s capacity to support e-mobility, with a subsequent significant
increase in carbon emissions avoided (4594 tonnes CO2 eq).
The total emissions saved (last column of Table 1) shows the potential of a PED to
reduce the carbon footprint of the district (and thus the city). These values (the sum of the
emissions saved through e-mobility and the use of RES) remain quite constant across all the
five scenarios. Indeed, the district’s potential for saving CO2 eq is proportional to the energy
required by the district. In the first three scenarios, total emissions are reduced because the
efficiency of the buildings is improved and, therefore, less electrical and thermal energy

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

9 of 15

is required. When the energy generated by the PED exceeds the total energy demand
(Scenario 4) we start increasing the e-mobility and computing the potential savings in terms
of mobility, and thus the total value of the potential for carbon reduction begins to increase
once more. Finally, the total energy generated from RES is used by a combination of
demand sources (buildings, lamps, and vehicles), which gives a slightly different potential
in terms of carbon emission savings. In other words, the carbon emissions initially saved
through the use of renewables in buildings (and the avoidance of using natural gas and the
utility grid) is later (in Scenarios 4 and 5) converted into carbon emissions reduced through
the introduction of EVs, which avoid the use of fossil fuels.
Figure 4 shows the distribution of monthly energy demand in terms of electricity (top
line) and overall net energy balances (bottom line). Due to space limitations, the columns
only show Scenarios 1, 4 and 5. Scenario 1 represents a district where the greatest demand
is represented by direct electricity consumption in buildings (53.77%). The heating systems
present a thermal demand (here represented by the consumption of heat pumps) that
only operates during the winter months (120 days/year), in annual terms, representing
41.74% of total thermal demand. Street lighting accounts for very little consumption
(2.32%) and e-mobility in the district accounts for 2.17%. Scenario 4 shows a district
with a better energy performance of buildings. This is mainly reflected in a reduction
in demand for thermal energy. The greatest demand (519 MWh/year, 73.36%) comes
from direct electricity consumption in buildings; the second highest (155.49 MWh/year or
21.99%) from heat pumps and the lowest energy demand is from EVs (28.41 MWh/year
or 4.02%) and lighting systems (4.48 MWh/year). In the latter case, there is a significant
80% reduction in consumption through the replacement of conventional lighting by LED
technology. Finally, Scenario 5 shows the district with the highest performance, where
all buildings are A-rated. In this case, the PED could export 3094.13 kWh/year if it only
powered 405 vehicles. Expressed in different terms, it is capable of maintaining a positive
annual balance (2670.94 kWh/year) and powering a total of 700 EVs, 42% more than in
Scenario 4.
In terms of monthly energy balances (Figure 4, bottom line), it is important to note
that all scenarios (even those with the poorest energy performance) have a positive balance
throughout seven months of the year (April through October). During this ‘extended
summer’ the irradiance profile in Spain is capable of enabling the self-consumption of
electricity in a small district where all roofs are fitted with PV (3000 m2 installed). As
energy insulation improves (from Scenario 1 to Scenario 5), the electricity required by the
heat pump decreases and the overall energy balance improves. This is further (though not
decisively) helped by the introduction of LED technology for street lighting. Other factors
that would help include a reduction in direct electricity consumption in buildings, which
could be facilitated by awareness-raising campaigns.
In terms of electricity, we assume that EVs are charged from 07:00 to 10:00. This EV
demand is added to the thermal and electricity demand of buildings, as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 5 shows the State of Charge (SOC) of the batteries together with the highest electrical
power demand from EVs (%kW) in Scenario 1 and Scenario 5. In the first case, EV power
demand reaches a maximum value of 28 kW and the ESS supports the district’s energy
demands in all cases except in December, January, and February. In winter months the
SOC falls to zero at 16:00 and the system is connected to the utility grid. In Scenario 5, EV
power demand reaches a maximum value of 48 kW, and the PED proves self-sufficient in
all months except January, when the district would be connected to the general grid.

dings 2022,Buildings
12, x FOR2022,
PEER
12,REVIEW
264

Figure 4. Monthly energy balances and PED demands for Scenario 1, Scenario 4 and Scenario 5.
Figure 4. Monthly energy balances and PED demands for Scenario 1, Scenario 4 and Scenario 5.

10 of 16

10 of 15

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

trical power demand from EVs (%kW) in Scenario 1 and Scenario 5. In the first case, EV
power demand reaches a maximum value of 28 kW and the ESS supports the district’s
energy demands in all cases except in December, January, and February. In winter months
the SOC falls to zero at 16:00 and the system is connected to the utility grid. In Scenario 5,
EV power demand reaches a maximum value of 48 kW, and the PED proves self‐sufficient
11 of 15
in all months except January, when the district would be connected to the general grid.

Figure
Figure5.5.Monthly
MonthlySOC
SOCvariation
variationand
andhighest
highestpower
powerdemand
demandfrom
frome‐mobility
e-mobilityininScenario
Scenario11and
and
Scenario
Scenario5.5.

Discussion
4.4.Discussion
Theimpact
impactofofe‐mobility
e-mobilityininaaPositive
PositiveEnergy
EnergyDistrict
Districthas
hasbeen
beenassessed
assessedby
byexamining
examining
The
five
scenarios
illustrating
a
range
of
operating
conditions.
This
simulation
analysis
is based
five scenarios illustrating a range of operating conditions. This simulation analysis
is
on
a
PED
model
that
assumes:
based on a PED model that assumes:

‐‐‐‐-

relativelysmall
smallrooftop
rooftopsurface
surfaceisisavailable
availableininrelation
relationtotothe
theenergy
energydemands
demandsofofaa
AArelatively
building
with
50–60
dwellings.
building with 50–60 dwellings.
Withappropriate
appropriate PV
PV orientation,
orientation, irradiance
With
irradiance values
valuesgenerate
generateaaconsiderable
considerableamount
amountof
2 ).
energy
(671
MW/year/m
2
of energy (671 MW/year/m ).
Urbandistricts
districts
made
a balanced
mixture
of residential
and use
public
use
Urban
areare
made
up up
of aof
balanced
mixture
of residential
and public
build‐
buildings,
with
different
patterns
of
energy
demand.
The
most
common
situation
ings, with different patterns of energy demand. The most common situation is thatis
that electricity
is provided
the general
gridthermal
and thermal
energy
by natural
electricity
is provided
by theby
general
grid and
energy
by natural
gas. gas.
Mobility
patterns
suggest
that
an
average
family
uses
1.4
vehicles,
and
Mobility patterns suggest that an average family uses 1.4 vehicles, and that that
each each
ve‐
vehicle
covers
12,947
km/year.
The
regular
vehicle
fleet
in
Spain
is
made
up
of
fossil
hicle covers 12,947 km/year. The regular vehicle fleet in Spain is made up of fossil
fuelvehicles.
vehicles.
fuel

Thesimulation‐based
simulation-based analysis
analysis examines
examines the
The
the circumstances
circumstancesunder
underwhich
whichthe
thegenerating
generat‐
capacity
(including
ESS
storage)
of
the
PED
can
meet
the
e-mobility
requirements
of local
ing capacity (including ESS storage) of the PED can meet the e‐mobility requirements
of
inhabitants. In this regard:
local inhabitants. In this regard:
•
It is worth noting that scenarios with buildings with an energy rating of A or B

It is worth noting that scenarios with buildings with an energy rating of A or B
achieve the targeted annual positivity. Only these scenarios can be considered as PEDs.
achieve the targeted annual positivity. Only these scenarios can be considered as
Although the building requirements for an A or B rating are very high, these might be
compensated for by other district measures not considered in this analysis, such as the
flexibility provided by the use of optimisation tools, trading mechanisms, etc.
•
Scenarios 1 to 3 do not achieve positivity; they feature older, low-efficiency buildings.
Buildings 2022, 12, x. https://doi.org/10.3390/xxxxx
www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings
In these cases, the energy deficit ranged from 4191.88 kWh/year to 7652.83 kWh/year,
which includes the power demand of 405 EVs as an intrinsic part of the district. In
terms of the power signal, the ESS considered (252 kW installed of Li-Ion technology)
would not be enough to support demand in winter months. The reduction in carbon
emissions due to e-mobility was equivalent to 12,885.44 tonnes of CO2 eq as compared
to vehicles running on fossil fuels (diesel and petrol). In Scenario 3, a positive annual
energy balance would not be achieved even if the demand from the EVs were avoided
(−3571.12 kWh annual balance).
•
Scenario 4 consists only of B-rated buildings and includes LED street lighting and
e-mobility. It can generate an energy surplus of 141.43 kWh. This small quantity
of energy exported outside the bounds of the PED means that the district can supports 550 EVs (based on average annual Spanish vehicle usage), equivalent to about
6,907,807 green kilometres. In this regard, about 17,450.76 tonnes of CO2 is saved
by replacing 550 fossil cars with their equivalent EVs. Of course, this extra energy
could open new opportunities in terms of energy trading or other energy related
businesses [44].

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

12 of 15

•

Scenario 5, where all buildings have an A rating (highly efficient new constructions),
will produce about 2670.94 kWh annual net energy surplus. Alternatively, it can
supply the power demand of 695 EVs, equivalent to 8,728,956 green kilometres. It can
also be measured as mobile energy storage, to be used inside or outside the PED. Daily
demand pattern analysis shows that the ESS would require fine-tuned control (or an
updated design) since it does not meet the energy demand in January. In annual terms,
this scenario avoids 22,044.45 tonnes of CO2 emissions through the replacement of
695 fossil fuel cars by EV equivalents alone. The energy surpluses in Scenario 5 again
open an opportunity to build energy communities that trade in energy, in line with
prosumer behaviour (Figure 3).
•
Figure 6 shows the relation between emissions saved by e-mobility, the annual balance
of the PED in the five scenarios, and the emissions of each one. It can clearly be seen
that positivity is achieved in Scenario 4 (B-rated buildings). This scenario features
a PED that not only achieves positivity, but also cuts total emissions (by about 71%
compared to Scenario 1, E-rated buildings). These profound renovations transform
the district into an eco-friendly urban area [45]. Moreover, for Scenario 4 (Building
certification B), we analyse the impact of e-mobility on the total energy balance of
the district. When diesel and petrol are used, emissions from cars come to about
17,000 tonnes of CO2 for 550 cars.
Figure 6 also shows that as the building energy (label) rating improves, the overall
•
annual energy balance becomes positive. This translates into a greater reduction in
carbon emissions from mobility since more EVs would be supported by the PED. In
parallel, as the energy performance in buildings increases (from an E to an A rating),
total energy demand decreases, with a subsequent reduction in savings through
the use of renewable energy (geothermal and PV) as opposed to traditional sources
(natural gas and the electricity grid). Nonetheless, this is still good news, since lower
Buildings 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW investment is required in renewables, a concept linked to the concept of the a Passive
13 of 16
House or Passive District [46].

Figure6.6.Effect
Effectofofimproved
improvedbuilding
buildingenergy
energyrating
ratingon
ondirect
directemissions
emissionssaved
savedby
bye-mobility
e‐mobilityand
andby
by
Figure
thePED
PEDasasaawhole.
whole.
the

5. Conclusions
This simulation‐based analysis examines the monthly and annual net energy bal‐
ances of five scenarios with different configurations of energy efficiency in buildings (as
represented by the Spanish energy rating system), street lighting systems and number of
electric vehicles. For an archetype model of an urban district comprising 6 buildings, 20

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

13 of 15

5. Conclusions
This simulation-based analysis examines the monthly and annual net energy balances
of five scenarios with different configurations of energy efficiency in buildings (as represented by the Spanish energy rating system), street lighting systems and number of electric
vehicles. For an archetype model of an urban district comprising 6 buildings, 20 streetlights
and 405 EVs, only those scenarios with a high energy performance in buildings had a net
annual positive balance, while all of them enjoyed positive balances during an ‘extended
summer’ period of seven months.
The results suggest that it is feasible to attain positivity in the energy performance
of the district (i.e., to create a Positive Energy District or PED) in a city in northern Spain
if local generation is provided by geothermal and photovoltaic energy and a high energy
performance of buildings is ensured. Indeed, for districts made up of A and B-rated
buildings (buildings designed using energy efficiency criteria that implement passive and
active management strategies), the PED could export energy in the form of e-mobility.
These promising scenarios satisfy district demands, provide 6,907,807 to 8,728,956 green
kilometres to other areas of the city, and save 17,450–22,044 tonnes of CO2 eq through the
use of EVs alone (as opposed to fossil fuel-based mobility). While the average Spanish
energy rating is low (between classes D and G), advancing to higher standards (between A
and B) would be a promising move, since it would lead to important savings in net energy
consumption (10,322 kWh/year) and total carbon emissions (13,370 tonnes CO2 eq/year).
Possible lines of future research might include continuing the analysis of PEDs and
improving the power and energy balance profiles by:
-

-

-

Analysing different strategies for decreasing direct electricity consumption in buildings. An agent-based simulation capable of tracking human behaviour would facilitate
such an assessment.
Providing a dynamic management of energy storage systems by using automatic
control strategies to improve the results for power and better deal with daily and
demand patterns.
Making use of the flexibility that EVs can provide and implementing Vehicle2Grid
strategies, which would flatten energy demand peaks.

The energy transition is resulting in a new generation of projects which take the district
(‘Positive Energy District’) as their main operational unit. Districts should, therefore, be
viewed not only as the sum of their buildings, but should also take into consideration
street elements and city fluxes as crucial elements of analysis. This analysis of energy
performance in five urban scenarios clearly shows to what extent e-mobility can benefit
urban districts and the overall profile of cities.
Author Contributions: Conceptualisation and visualisation, A.A.-V.; data curation, investigation,
software, writing and formal analysis, T.C.-C.; analysis of results and validation, C.E.B.; methodology,
funding acquisition, research supervision, and writing—review & editing, C.M. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme under the grant agreement No. 891943.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data used for this simulation based analysis are uploaded for free
download at https://zenodo.org/record/6226993#.YhUVMujMK70.
Acknowledgments: University of Deusto thanks ATELIER—Amsterdam-Bilbao citizen driven smart
cities Innovation Action funded under H2020 programme (Grant Agreement No. 864374).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

14 of 15

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.

21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

IEA. Global CO2 Emissions by Sector, 2018—Charts—Data & Statistics—IEA. 2020. Available online: https://www.iea.org/dataand-statistics/charts/global-co2-emissions-by-sector-2018 (accessed on 14 July 2021).
C2ES. Global Emissions: Center for Climate and Energy Solutions; Center for Climate and Energy Solutions: Arlington, VA, USA,
2016. Available online: https://www.c2es.org/content/international-emissions/ (accessed on 14 July 2021).
Seyboth, K.M.; Sverrisson, F. Renewables 2016 Global Status Report; REN21: Paris, France, 2016; ISBN 978-3-9818107-0-7.
SmartGrids SRA 2035 Strategic Research Agenda Update of the SmartGrids SRA 2007 for the Needs by the Year 2035. Available
online: https://www.etip-snet.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/sra2035.pdf (accessed on 25 November 2021).
Purohit, S.; Energy, W.; Purohit, S. Front-Loading Net Zero; Wärtsilä Energy: Paris, France, 2021. Available online: http://www.
wartsila.com/brandhub/marketing-material#inpage-anchor-9 (accessed on 21 November 2021).
Cozzi, L.; Gül, T. Net Zero by 2050: A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector; International Energy Agency: Paris, France, 2021.
Fichera, A.; Pluchino, A.; Volpe, R. Modelling Energy Distribution in Residential Areas: A Case Study Including Energy Storage
Systems in Catania, Southern Italy. Energies 2020, 13, 3715. [CrossRef]
Howell, S.; Rezgui, Y.; Hippolyte, J.-L.; Jayan, B.; Li, H. Towards the next generation of smart grids: Semantic and holonic
multi-agent management of distributed energy resources. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 77, 193–214. [CrossRef]
Capasso, C.; Veneri, O. Experimental study of a DC charging station for full electric and plug in hybrid vehicles. Appl. Energy
2015, 152, 131–142. [CrossRef]
Pearson, P.J.; Foxon, T.J. A low carbon industrial revolution? Insights and challenges from past technological and economic
transformations. Energy Policy 2012, 50, 117–127. [CrossRef]
Mies, J.J.; Helmus, J.R.; Hoed, R.V.D. Estimating the Charging Profile of Individual Charge Sessions of Electric Vehicles in The
Netherlands. World Electr. Veh. J. 2018, 9, 17. [CrossRef]
Zhang, J.; Yan, J.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, H.; Lv, G. Daily electric vehicle charging load profiles considering demographics of vehicle users.
Appl. Energy 2020, 274, 115063. [CrossRef]
Bhatti, A.R.; Salam, Z. A rule-based energy management scheme for uninterrupted electric vehicles charging at constant price
using photovoltaic-grid system. Renew. Energy 2018, 125, 384–400. [CrossRef]
Uimonen, S.; Lehtonen, M. Simulation of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations Load Profiles in Office Buildings Based on Occupancy
Data. Energies 2020, 13, 5700. [CrossRef]
Rodríguez, L.R. Achieving Energy-Efficient Districts: Contributions through Large-Scale Characterization and Demand Side
Management. Ph.D. Thesis, Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain, 2018.
Fachrizal, R.; Munkhammar, J. Improved Photovoltaic Self-Consumption in Residential Buildings with Distributed and Centralized Smart Charging of Electric Vehicles. Energies 2020, 13, 1153. [CrossRef]
Fachrizal, R.; Shepero, M.; Åberg, M.; Munkhammar, J. Optimal PV-EV sizing at solar powered workplace charging stations with
smart charging schemes considering self-consumption and self-sufficiency balance. Appl. Energy 2021, 307, 118139. [CrossRef]
Bossi, S.; Gollner, C.; Theierling, S. Towards 100 Positive Energy Districts in Europe: Preliminary Data Analysis of 61 European
Cases. Energies 2020, 13, 6083. [CrossRef]
International Energy Agency. Global EV Outlook 2021—Accelerating Ambitions Despite the Pandemic. Paris. 2021. Available
online: https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/ed5f4484-f556-4110-8c5c-4ede8bcba637/GlobalEVOutlook2021.pdf (accessed
on 20 January 2022).
Turci, G.; Alpagut, B.; Civiero, P.; Kuzmic, M.; Pagliula, S.; Massa, G.; Albert-Seifried, V.; Seco, O.; Soutullo, S. A Comprehensive
PED-Database for Mapping and Comparing Positive Energy Districts Experiences at European Level. Sustainability 2021, 14, 427.
[CrossRef]
Hinterberger, R.; Gollner, C.; Noll, M.; Meyer, S.; Schwarz, H.-G. Reference Framework for Positive Energy Districts and
Neighbourhoods. 2020. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/ped/ (accessed on 20 January 2022).
Bottecchia, L.; Gabaldón, A.; Castillo-Calzadilla, T.; Soutullo, S.; Ranjbar, S.; Eicker, U. Fundamentals of Energy Modelling for
Positive Energy Districts. In Sustainability in Energy and Buildings 2021; Littlewood, J.R., Howlett, R.J., Jain, L.C., Eds.; Springer:
Singapore, 2022; pp. 435–445.
Moreno, A.G.; Vélez, F.; Alpagut, B.; Hernández, P.; Montalvillo, C.S. How to Achieve Positive Energy Districts for Sustainable
Cities: A Proposed Calculation Methodology. Sustainability 2021, 13, 710. [CrossRef]
Bruck, A.; Ruano, S.D.; Auer, H. A Critical Perspective on Positive Energy Districts in Climatically Favoured Regions: An
Open-Source Modelling Approach Disclosing Implications and Possibilities. Energies 2021, 14, 4864. [CrossRef]
Paiho, S.; Hoang, H.; Hukkalainen, M. Energy and emission analyses of solar assisted local energy solutions with seasonal heat
storage in a Finnish case district. Renew. Energy 2017, 107, 147–155. [CrossRef]
Fichera, A.; Pluchino, A.; Volpe, R. Local Production and Storage in Positive Energy Districts: The Energy Sharing Perspective.
Front. Sustain. Cities 2021, 3, 57. [CrossRef]
Thiers, S.; Peuportier, B. Energy and environmental assessment of two high energy performance residential buildings. Build.
Environ. 2012, 51, 276–284. [CrossRef]
Komninos, N. Net Zero Energy Districts: Connected Intelligence for Carbon-Neutral Cities. Land 2022, 11, 210. [CrossRef]

Buildings 2022, 12, 264

29.

30.
31.
32.
33.

34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

39.

40.

41.
42.
43.

44.
45.
46.

15 of 15

Tuerk, A.; Frieden, D.; Neumann, C.; Latanis, K.; Tsitsanis, A.; Kousouris, S.; Llorente, J.; Heimonen, I.; Reda, F.; Ala-Juusela, M.;
et al. Integrating Plus Energy Buildings and Districts with the EU Energy Community Framework: Regulatory Opportunities,
Barriers and Technological Solutions. Buildings 2021, 11, 468. [CrossRef]
Junker, R.G.; Azar, A.G.; Lopes, R.A.; Lindberg, K.B.; Reynders, G.; Relan, R.; Madsen, H. Characterizing the energy flexibility of
buildings and districts. Appl. Energy 2018, 225, 175–182. [CrossRef]
Mehrjerdi, H.; Iqbal, A.; Rakhshani, E.; Torres, J.R. Daily-seasonal operation in net-zero energy building powered by hybrid
renewable energies and hydrogen storage systems. Energy Convers. Manag. 2019, 201, 112156. [CrossRef]
Florio, P.; Tendon, X.; Fleury, J.; Costantini, C.; Schueler, A.; Scartezzini, J.-L. Performance Assessment of a nZEB Carbon Neutral
Living/Office Space and Its Integration into a District Energy-Hub. Energies 2022, 15, 793. [CrossRef]
Castillo-Calzadilla, T.; Fessler, S.; Borges, C.E.; Andonegui, C.M. Urban District Modelling Simulation-Based Analysis: Under
Which Scenarios Can We Achieve a Positive Energy District? In Proceedings of the 2021 18th International Multi-Conference on
Systems, Signals & Devices (SSD), Monastir, Tunisia, 22–25 March 2021; pp. 1107–1114. [CrossRef]
Makvandia, G. Safiuddin Obstacles to Developing Net-Zero Energy (NZE) Homes in Greater Toronto Area. Buildings 2021, 11, 95.
[CrossRef]
Zhang, X.; Penaka, S.; Giriraj, S.; Sánchez, M.; Civiero, P.; Vandevyvere, H. Characterizing Positive Energy District (PED) through
a Preliminary Review of 60 Existing Projects in Europe. Buildings 2021, 11, 318. [CrossRef]
European Commission. JRC Photovoltaic Geographical Information System (PVGIS)—European Commission. Available online:
https://re.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pvg_tools/en/tools.html#PVP (accessed on 13 July 2021).
Instituto Para la Diversificación y Ahorro de la Energía (IDAE). Calificación de Efficiencia Energética de Edificios; IDEA: Madrid,
India, 2009.
Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 2010 on the Energy Performance of Buildings.
Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2010:153:0013:0035:EN:PDF (accessed on
20 January 2022).
Forococheselectricos. Así es la Curva de Carga del Volkswagen ID.3 Pro Performance: Se Mantiene a 100 kW Hasta Llegar al 40%
de Carga. Available online: https://forococheselectricos.com/2020/10/curva-carga-volkswagen-id-3-pro-performance.html
(accessed on 23 October 2020).
Instituto Nacional de Estadística. Km Medios Recorridos al Año por los Vehículos para uso Personal, por Relación con la
Actividad Económica de la Persona de Referencia y Antigüedad del Vehículo. 2008. Available online: https://www.ine.es/jaxi/
Datos.htm?path=/t25/p500/2008/p08/l0/&file=08019.px (accessed on 14 July 2021).
Instituto Para la Diversificación y Ahorro de la Energía (IDAE). Consumo y Emisiones de CO2 . Vehículos Nuevos. 2016. Available
online: http://coches.idae.es/consumo-de-carburante-y-emisiones (accessed on 19 July 2021).
Volkswagen España. How Can I upload? Available online: https://www.volkswagen.es/es/electricos-hibridos/carga/comopuedo-cargar.html (accessed on 14 July 2021).
Make a Good Choice: What Is the Difference between a Home with an a Energy Rating and a g Energy Rating? Available
online: https://www.ennaranja.com/hipotecas/elegir-bien/elige-bien-que-diferencia-hay-entre-una-vivienda-con-calificacionenergetica-a-y-g/ (accessed on 13 December 2021).
Pressmair, G.; Kapassa, E.; Casado-Mansilla, D.; Borges, C.E.; Themistocleous, M. Overcoming barriers for the adoption of Local
Energy and Flexibility Markets: A user-centric and hybrid model. J. Clean. Prod. 2021, 317, 128323. [CrossRef]
Baek, S.G. Plan for the Sustainability of Public Buildings through the Energy Efficiency Certification System: Case Study of Public
Sports Facilities, Korea. Buildings 2021, 11, 589. [CrossRef]
Wang, R.; Lu, S.; Feng, W. A three-stage optimization methodology for envelope design of passive house considering energy
demand, thermal comfort and cost. Energy 2019, 192, 116723. [CrossRef]

