International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019 07–20

OPENING

European Union funding Research Development and Innovation
projects on Smart Cities: the state of the art in 2019
Paola Clerici Maestosia*, Paolo Civierob and Gilda Massac
a

 NEA Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development – Energy Technolgies
E
Department, Via Martiri di Monte Sole, 4, 40129 Bologna, Italy
b IREC Catalonia Institute for Energy Research, Jardins de les Dones de Negre, 1, 08930 Sant Adrià de Besòs, Barcelona, Spain
c ENEA Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development – Energy Technologies
Department, Piazzale Enrico Fermi, 1, 80055 Portici NA, Italy
ABSTRACT

Keywords:

European cities currently host 72% of the European population, which probably will rise to 80%
by 2050.

Cities in EU policy;
Budget for smart cities;
Demonstration projects;
Positive Energy Districts;

European Union, Member States, National and Regions Authorities and different type of
stakeholders have worked – and keep on doing – together to promote a sustainable urban
development and to adapt policies to the needs of cities, thus make visible improvements to the
daily lives of people.

URL: http://doi.org/10.5278/ijsepm.3493

According to this approach, many Member States decided to pool resources at european level,
achieving more than by acting alone. It is thanks to the coordinated approach of European Union
and Member State that Research Development & Innovation boost smart cities and smart
specialization strategies as two novelties that have been adopted by policymakers.

1. The Smart City concept
Cities and urban areas have been a key issue in EU/
Member State policies and programs, in the light of the
fact that over two thirds of the European population live
in urban areas and that cities were and will be places
where both problems emerge and solutions are found,
places which are fertile ground for growth of science
and technology, to stimulate culture and innovation, to
support individual and collective creativity and where,
more than elsewhere, climate change mitigation can be
more easily understand. Cities play a crucial role as
engines of the economy, places of connectivity, creativity and innovation, as well as centers of services for the
surrounding areas. Therefore, cities represent a high

priority for the effective implementation of Europe
itself.
Although European cities play a key role in the life of
Europeans, it seems almost incongruent and senseless
that there is no common definition for “urban” or even
for “city”, and that the European Union has no explicit
jurisdiction in urban development, as urban planning per
se is not a European policy competence even if economic, social and territorial cohesion all have a strong
urban dimension. Therefore, even if the “European
model of the city” is a fascinating issue, it is clear that
there is no need to adopt a single definition. However, it
is possible to move towards a shared European vision of
urban development, as noted by the paper “Cities of
Tomorrow” (DG Regional Policy, 2011) which consider

*Corresponding author e-mail: paola.clerici@enea.it

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

7

European Union funding Research Development and Innovation projects on Smart Cities: the state of the art in 2019

Acronyms and Abbreviations
DG: Directorate General
EIP: European Industrial Partnership
ERDF: European Regional Development Fund
ESIF: European Structural and Investment Funds
EU: European Union;
H2020 Framework: Horizon 2020 Framework
KPIs: Key Performance Indicators
ICT: information and Communication Technologies

PED/PEN: Positive Energy Districts/Positive Energy
Neighborhoods
RD&I: research, Development & Innovation
SCC: Smart Cities and Communities
SDGs: Sustainable Development Goals
SME: Small and medium Enterprise
SUD: Smart Urban Districts

that “there is not a single vision of the European city
model but there might be as many visions as there are
Europeans. These visions are diverse as they build on
different realities, different strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities and threats as well as different values”.
This means that Europe can play a role in defining
and setting up of the framework and providing guiding
principles for the growth of a shared vision of European
cities, in which the dimension of a sustainable urban
development is taken into account in an integrated way.
In general terms, this is what took place with European
funding in RD&I: even if EC has no explicit competence
in urban development and policies Research Development
& Innovation programs have undoubtedly contributed to
promote and support a shared European vision for smart
cities.
Many of these programs have become EU trademarks
and trade names, making the EU visible and recognizable in the daily lives of its citizens.
The idea behind this shared vision is that European
cities aspire to be places of green, ecological and environmental regeneration as well as places of advanced
social progress, platforms for democracy, cultural dialogue and diversity.
Since 2007 discussions, workshops, white papers,
DoW (documents of Work) have been written, created and
developed about the future of cities, both at national and
European level, as well as glossaries have been p­ repared
according to the idea that in the transition
from industrial to knowledge-based societies, the cities
in the world are changing their shapes. As a result,
new ­
definitions were created such as: healthy citiesi,

slow citiesii, slum citiesiii, community citiesiv, shrinking
citiesv,
second
citiesvi,
historical
citiesvii,

i

 ities that, according to WHO, are continually creating and improving
C
physical and social environments and expanding community resources.
These efforts enable citizens to mutually support each other in performing
all functions of life and developing to their maximum potential. For an
increasing number of cities, the healthy city model is seen as particularly
valuable because it attracts resourceful citizens; Huset Mandag Morgen,
special edition on Futures of cities, may 2007, DK

8

ii

Cities that respond to the high pulse of the modern metropolis by launching
concepts that slow down the pace. These will typically be cities whose
layout and amenities support a lifestyle that prioritises recreational activity,
the possibility of relaxing and enjoying life. A number of these cities have
joined the “Slow City Movement” inaugurated in 1999 in the Italian city of
Orvieto. The original incentive for this movement was “slow food”, the
wish to increase the knowledge about and demand for this type of cuisine;
Huset Mandag Morgen, special edition on Futures of cities, may 2007, DK
iii Cities that are affected by great poverty. Such cities will typically have
districts where the poorest citizens live in miserable conditions with no
access to adequate health services, medical and social help, education,
work, etc. These harsh conditions often make these districts appear as a
threat to their surroundings: the environing communities typically react by
sealing themselves off from the slum district, Huset Mandag Morgen,
special edition on Futures of cities, may 2007, DK
iv Cities where citizens experience a special community feeling and interact
closely with other people in their neighborhood. These cities create and
maintain local values and ensure a sense of security for the individual
citizen. They are characterized by strong cohesion that is defined by the
citizens’ shared values and local attachment rather than by the functions
the city is expected to fulfil; Huset Mandag Morgen, special edition on
Futures of cities, may 2007, DK
v Cities that are getting smaller in size, thus contradicting global urbanization
trends. The decrease in size is often a consequence of a drop in birth rates
and/or the closing of larger industrial workplaces that have contributed
significantly to the growth of the cities. Many shrinking cities make
dedicated efforts to adjust to the demands of the knowledge society, in
which the ability to generate growth does not necessarily depends on size;
Huset Mandag Morgen, special edition on Futures of cities, may 2007, DK
vi Cities that stand in the shadow of the most important city in a given
country or region. The definition “second city” is increasingly used about
cities that have defied their status as “provincial” in recent years, and have
managed to assert themselves in the competition for resources and growth,
in some regions and countries, the strong first cities feel overtaken and
intimidated because the combination of smaller size and independence
make second cities move faster than their larger counterparts; Huset
Mandag Morgen, special edition on Futures of cities, may 2007, DK
vii Cities that have made significant historic contributions to urban
development. This definition is typically used for cities listed on the UN’s
World Heritage List. It is also used to define cities that have historic sites,
buildings, landmarks, etc. that have contributed to significant events in the
world history, hereby profiling the city to the outside world. The primary
challenge for cities in this category is to retain their historic distinction
while still meeting the needs of modern citizens; Huset Mandag Morgen,
special edition on Futures of cities, may 2007, DK

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Paola Clerici Maestosi, Paolo Civiero and Gilda Massa

and then green ­citiesviii, and - last but not least - ­qualityof-life citiesix.
Besides all these one has started to prevail: the Smart
City paradigm. Maybe because as a huge amount of
funding - national, international and EC - has been dedicated to this topic, due to the large number of stakeholders that could be catalyzed in the design, scaling up and
replicability of the smart city itself.
It is matter of fact that the definitions of Smart
Cities have changed over the years based on aims and
goals of different proponents, stakeholders and supporters but, the last definition that have been proposed
by EIP in Smart Cities and Communities – Strategic
and Implementation Plan, is probably the one which
is better to mention here: “Smart cities should be
regarded as systems of people interacting with and
using flows of energy, materials, services and financing to catalyze sustainable economic development,
resilience and high quality of life; these flows and
interactions become smart through making strategic
use of information and communication infrastructure
and services in a process of transparent urban planning and management that is responsive to the social
and economic needs of society”.
2. Smart Cities and Smart Cities related topic:
state of the art in 2019
2.1. Numbers within the Smart Cities and Smart
Cities related projects
Today Europe capitalize on over 30 years of investment
in transnational Research and Innovation programmes
on sustainable urban development. European Union
budget has - indeed - contributed to deploy solutions on
the “things that matter” for Europeans such as urban
areas, which have been a key issue in European
Community funding programmes.
viii Cities

that are based on a mindset of sustainability and energy-efficient
solutions with a view to reducing CO2 emission and bringing down the
consumption of energy resources. This is seen in different ways, for instance
by having a well-functioning public infrastructure that ensures minimal use
of cars in the city, and dense building with defined standards for building
materials, design, etc. that are as environmentally friendly as possible; Huset
Mandag Morgen, special edition on Futures of cities, may 2007, DK
ix Cities whose primary purpose is to ensure a high quality of life for their
citizens. Their efforts range from high health standards to local initiatives
that ensure a dignified life for all citizens. The latter is achieved by
providing sufficient opportunities for education and work. It requires a
balance between public and individual needs. Through their organization
and physical layout, these cities wish to guarantee safety and security
while ensuring that the individual citizen feels free and content as a
member of a larger community; Huset Mandag Morgen, special edition on
Futures of cities, may 2007, DK

In the last five years the EC promoted Research
Development & Innovation on urban issues providing
support through a wide range of funding programs ­covering different funding opportunities according to
main pillars in H2020 Framework, namely Excellence in
Science, Industrial Leadership and Societal Challenges
with following distribution [Figure 1]:
• 16 projects under program H2020-EU.3.3.1.3. Foster European Smart cities and Communities;
• 2 project under program H2020-EU3.3 Societal
Challenges - Secure, clean and efficient energy;
• 9 projects under program H2020-EU.2.1.1
Industrial Leadership - leadership in enabling and
industrial technologies - Information and
Communication technologies (ICT)
• 2 projects under program H2020-EU.2.1.1.7. –
ECSEL
• 1 project under the Program H2020-EU.3.4.8.1.
- Innovation Program 1 (IP1): Cost-efficient and
reliable trains
• 2 project under program H2020-EU.3.4.8.3. Innovation Program 3: Cost Efficient and Reliable
High Capacity Infrastructure
• 1 project under Program H2020-EU.3.4.8.4. Innovation Programme 4: IT Solutions for
attractive railway services
• 1 project under Program H2020-EU.3.3.4. - A
single, smart European electricity grid
• 1 project under Program H2020-EU.1.2.2. - FET
Proactive
• 2 project under Program H2020-EU.3.3.7. Market uptake of energy innovation - building on
Intelligent Energy Europe
The overall budget related to H2020-EU.3.3.1.3. Foster European Smart cities and Communities has been
357,675,069.34 with EU contribution for 302,892,122.37,
while the overall budget related to the other cited programs has been €133.854.886,79 with EU contribution
for €114.112.165,98 [Figure 2]. This data clearly states
that if we refer to Smart Cities we automatically refers
to H2020 – Foster European Smart Cities and
Communities but, even if the amount of additional
funded projects related to Smart Cities in different calls
is less than the ones in H2020-EU.3.3.1.3., have been
funded the same quantity of projects, which means the
appealing of smart cities related topics.
Then, if we refer to the type of funded projects it is
easy to see that:
37 projects funded cover all the projects type spectrum, as we have 59% of Innovation Actions; 19% of

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

9

European Union funding Research Development and Innovation projects on Smart Cities: the state of the art in 2019

Figure 1: Smart Cities/Smart Cities related topics: project funded in H2020 (image elaborated by authors on a set of data source period
2014–2018 (end) [1,2,3])

Figure 2: Smart Cities/Smart Cities related topics: overall budget funded in H2020 (image elaborated by authors on a set of data source
period 2014–2018 (end) [1,2,3])

10

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Paola Clerici Maestosi, Paolo Civiero and Gilda Massa

Research and Innovation Actions; 16% of Coordination
and support action;2% of Feasibility studies
Looking at project dimension the Innovation actions
have received a funding of €380.081.613,52, the Research
and Innovation stands at €30.218.711,83, whilst
Coordination and Support Actions together with feasibility studies request an amount of €6.801.051,25 [Figure 3].
This is a clear indicator of the high Technology
Redness Level of these project and how near they are to
the market uptake.
It is also important to stress the fact that in the period
2014-2020 the urban dimension has been put at the very
heart of EC Cohesion Policy, too.
Thanks to European Regional Development Fund
(ERDF) and European Structural and Investment Funds
(ESIF) Member States funded thematic objectives programmes with a strong focus on 4 key priority areas
(Research and Innovation, Digital Economy, SME
Competitiveness and Low Carbon Economy took place);
so overall budget estimated for the period 2014-2020 has
been € 278,942,793,261.00 with an investment on topic
related to sustainable urban development such as ICT,
renewable energy and energy efficiency of
€ 2,388,082,326.00. [3]
Thus European Union stimulated, in various and different ways, cities to be actors of Open Innovation in
responding to the present environmental, social and
economic challenges.
European Union, Member States, National and
Regions Authorities and different type of stakeholders
have worked - and keep on doing - together to promote
a sustainable urban development and to adapt policies to

the needs of cities, thus make visible improvements to
the daily lives of people.
As highlighted in EERA JPSC special issue 1|2018
Towards and European vision for the Smart Cities to
come “According to this approach, many Member States
pooled resources at European level, achieving more than
by acting alone. Therefore, together with national budgets and a wide range of legislative and regulatory
instruments, the EU budget has allowed to support
shared objectives and tackle common challenges including CO2 reduction in urban areas and a carbon-neutral
economy thorough initiatives aimed at implementing the
so-called ‘smart cities’. It is thanks to the coordinated
EU/Member State approach that RD&I boost smart
cities and smart specialization strategies as two novelties that have been quickly adopted by policymakers,
then translated into specific policies and initiatives that
were mainstreamed into regional policies.”
The EU Research and Innovation policy has been
supported - and still it is - by Horizon 2020 Framework
Programme, the main instrument in which new research
and innovation on sustainable urban development has
been designed. The main policy goals have been to spur
novel solutions and partnerships to urban challenges and
to create an open community of practice.
Thus, Horizon 2020 supported different solution-­
oriented initiatives to respond to the complexity of
Societal Challenges related to cities and urban areas,
indeed.
Multiple large scale demonstration projects were
launched in the framework of the cross-cutting Focus
Area on ‘Smart and Sustainable Cities’, which called for

Figure 3: Smart Cities/Smart Cities related topics: type of actions funded in H2020 (image elaborated by authors on a set of data source
period 2014–2018 (end) [1,2,3])

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

11

European Union funding Research Development and Innovation projects on Smart Cities: the state of the art in 2019

a systemic approach to stimulate sustainable urban
development, in which cities act as living labs to create
an open innovation ecosystem. “Frontrunner” cities
develop and test innovative solutions. These solutions
are deployed at a wider scale through peer-learning with
dedicated “Follower” cities.
The most of these multiple large scale demonstration
projects – supported by H2020 lighthouse call (SCC2014/2018) are still ongoing (data referred to end 2018)
while just CITYKEYS and ESPRESSO have been completed.
Nerveless, some interesting considerations follows:
• 38 cities have been or still are working as
Lighthouse SCC pilot cities (Antalya, Bristol,
Dresden, Eindhoven, Firenze, Glasgow,
Goteborg, Groningen, Hamburg, Helsinki, Leeds,
Limerick, Lisbon, London, Lyon, Manchester,

•

Milano, Munich, Nantes, Nice, Nottingham,
Oulu, Pamplona, Rotterdam, San Sebastian,
Sondeborg, Stavanger, Tampere, Tartu, Tepebasi/
Eskisehir, Trento, Trondheim, Umea, Utrecht,
Valencia, Valladolid, Vienna, Vitoria/Gasteiz),
while 30 as Lighthouse SCC follower cities
(Asenovgrad, Bordeaux, Brno, Burgas,
Bydgoszcz, Cluj-Napoca, Derry, Essen, Gdansk,
Herzliya, Kerava, Kozani, Lousanne, Lecce,
Leipzig, Litomerice, Miskolc, Nilufer, Ostend,
Palencia, Parma, Prague, Rijeka, Sabadell,
Santiago de Compostela, Seraing, Skopje, Sofia,
Venezia, Warsaw) [Figure 4];
Project leader in Lighthouse SCC are located in
Spain (7), Netherlands and UK (2), Finland,
France, Germany, Norway and Sweden (1)
[Figure 5];

Figure 4: Pilot Cities/Follower Cities in Lighthouse SCC H2020 (image elaborated by authors on a set of data source period 2014–2018
(end) [1,2,3])

12

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Paola Clerici Maestosi, Paolo Civiero and Gilda Massa

Figure 5: Project leader distribution in Lighthouse SCC H2020 (image elaborated by authors on a set of data source period 2014–2018
(end) [1,2,3])

•

•

countries participation per projects in Lighthouse
SCC is subdivided in Spain (14), Germany and
Italy (11), Belgium (8), France Netherlands and
UK (7), Bulgaria and Finland (6), Austria,
Czech, Poland, Romania, Turkey (4), Denmark,
Estonia, Greece, Sweden (3), Croatia, Hungary,
Ireland, Norway, Portugal, Switzerland (2),
North Macedonia, Israel, Malta, Slovakia (1)
[Figure 6];
participants stakeholders within the country
ranks: Spain (88), Germany (48), UK (44), Italy
(43), Netherlands (39), France (31), Sweden (29),
Finland (28), Norway (16), Turkey (15), Austria
(12), Estonia (11), Ireland and Denmark (10),
Portugal, Bulgaria and Belgium (9), Poland (7),
Romani (6), Greece and Czech (5), Switzerland,
Slovakia, Hungary, Croatia (2), Malta, North
Macedonia and Israel (1) [Figure 7].

If we consider that is highly desirable, for testing the
coverage of Smart Cities concepts in Member State,
the participation of Municipalities not only as
Lighthouse Cities but also as Follower Cities, we discover that only few Member States (Finland, France,
Germany, Italy, Spain, Turkey and United Kingdom)
are well positioned; thus this could be indicative of a
sort of implicit national roadmap supporting the experimentation and replication of Smart Cities concept.
Another surprising data refers to the fact that there is
not a direct correspondence among being a Lighthouse
Cities and promoting the involvement of may stakeholders. If we refer to the Italian situation we will see
that even if there are not Italian lighthouse cities, the
number of stakeholders participating in lighthouse
projects is significantly high. This again demonstrate
how much pervasive the Smart Cities concept has been
at a national level.

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

13

European Union funding Research Development and Innovation projects on Smart Cities: the state of the art in 2019

Figure 6: Countries participation in H2020 (image elaborated by authors on a set of data source period 2014–2018 (end) [1,2,3])

Then if we refer to Smart Cities related topics projects we highlight that we have 367 european partner
while the biggest project SinchroniCity involves partners even from Mexico, South Corea and Switzerland
with, as clear, no EU contribution.
Looking at data collected we can see that:
• Project leader are located in Spain (4), Germany,
UK, Belgium, (2), Austria, Greece, Eire, Italy,
Portugal, Denmark, Slovenia (1) [Figure 8];
• countries participation is Spain (71), Germany
(49), Italy (36), France (28), Austria (24) UK
(22), Greece (16), Belgium and Portugal (14),
Switzerland (10), Ireland (8), Norway, Sweden
and Slovenia (6), Czechia (5), Denmark and
Mexico (4), Luxemburg, South Korea and Serbia
(3), Turkey, Israele, Croazia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina (2), Poland, Slovakia and Lituania
(1) [Figure 9];

14

According to the data exposed we can express following consideration:
• Smart Cities related topics projects have involved
36 States: 2 extra Europe (Mexico and South
Korea) and Switzerland, plus 33 among Member
States and Observers.
• top five counties per participation in Smart Cities
related project are Spain 19%, Germany 11%,
Italy 9%, UK 8% and France 7% [Figure 10]
2.2. Topics within the Smart Cities and Smart Cities
related projects
Smart Cities and Smart Cities related projects funded by
H2020 lighthouse call (SCC-2014/2018) are focused on
specific topics such as:
• Energy Efficiency in Buildings – among which the
most successful topics has been Building Integrated

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Paola Clerici Maestosi, Paolo Civiero and Gilda Massa

Figure 7: Participants stakeholders per Countries participation in H2020 (image elaborated by authors on a set of data source period
2014–2018 (end) [1,2,3])

•

•

•

•

Renewable Energy Sources and additionally
Building Envelop retrofitting [Figure 11a];
Mobility and Transport – among which the most
successful topics has been Electric, Hybrid and
Clean Vehicles and additionally Clean Fuels and
Fueling Infrastructure[Figure 11b];
ICT - among which the most successful topics has
been Building Energy Management System and
additionally ICT as Planning Support [Figure
11c];
Energy System Integration – among which the
most successful topics has been Electrical Energy
Storage and additionally District heating and
Cooling[Figure 11d];
Others– among which the most successful topics
has been Smart Cities and Communities and

additionally Demonstration Projects, and
Integration of Energy Systems, ICT and transport
in Cities [Figure 11e].
3. 2020 and beyond
The White Paper on the future of Europe and the previous reflection papers showed that the EU27 has faced
and still will face a wide range of challenges in the
period up to 2025 and beyond. Among these there are
current trends that will last relevant for decades to come,
such as demographic change e social cohesion, economic convergence, digital revolution, globalization and
climate change.
Sustainable development has - for a long time - been
a central and core topic of the European project. Today

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

15

European Union funding Research Development and Innovation projects on Smart Cities: the state of the art in 2019

Figure 8: Project Leaders participating in Smart Cities related topics projects in H2020 (image elaborated by authors on a set of data source
period 2014–2018 (end) [1,2,3])

European Member State face many challenges related to
sustainability: youth unemployment, ageing population,
climate change, pollution, sustainable energy and migration. The 2030 United Nation Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the sustainable development goals
(SDGs) represent a priority for EU policy, both internally and externally. The economic, social and environmental dimension, which are at the heart of SDGs, have
been incorporated in several EU budget and spending
programs. They have been central into the Europe 2020
strategy to boost education and innovation (smart), low
carbon emissions, climate resilience and environmental
protection (sustainable), job creation and poverty reduction (inclusive).
Many of the programs promoted by EU are now a
sort of trademarks in the daily livfe of European citizens. Indeed, there is still room to further improve

16

their performance and increase their impact, avoiding
overlap and stimulating combination of instruments
thus promoting alignment. The current generation of
programs have promoted major reforms providing
more funding on key Europeans priorities such as
employment, social inclusion, research and innovation skills, energy resource and efficiency. On the
other side on the other side policies to manage have
become increasingly complex, hampering on-ground
implementation and creating delays: layers of controls and bureaucratic complexity make it difficult for
beneficiaries to access these funds and deliver projects quickly.
Indeed, urban planning activities have changed thanks
to technological development promoted also by Research
Development & Innovation programs. The budget constraints and the complexity of urban investments needed

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Paola Clerici Maestosi, Paolo Civiero and Gilda Massa

Figure 9: Stakeholders participation per countries in Smart Cities related topics projects in H2020 period 2014–2018 (end) (image elaborated
by authors on a set of data source [1,2,3])
20%
18%
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%

LT

MK

BA

MT

SZ

HU

RS

KOR

IL

LU

SK

MEX

SI

HR

PL

RO

CH

BG

EF

CZ

DK

IE

TR

EL

PT

NO

SE

BE

FI

AT

FR

NL

IT

UK

ES

DE

0%

Figure 10: Counties per participation in Smart Cities related project (image elaborated by authors on a set of data source [1,2,3])

for Smart Cities and Communities solutions led city
administrations to require the involvement of private
players thus adapting the governance of cities in order to

attract them. Therefore, Smart Cities can evolve thanks
new modes of value creation through the intermediation
of public-private partnerships, cross-sectorial collabora-

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

17

European Union funding Research Development and Innovation projects on Smart Cities: the state of the art in 2019

Figure 11: Keywords for specific topics: (a) Energy Efficiency in Buildings, (b) Mobility and Transport, (c) ICT, (d) Energy System
Integration, (e) Others. (image elaborated by authors on a set of data source [1,2,3])

tions, city-led “open innovation marketplaces” and other
forms of governance.
We assume that there is not a unique way or a single
approach to stimulate transitions of a city into a smart
city; cities in Europe have adopted different solutions,
each of them reflecting specific circumstances.

18

4. Conclusion
According to above consideration, it appears that three
basic elements could best describe the European vision
about Smart Cities. The first is that there is not a single
vision for the European Smart City, but there have been
as many visions as there are Europeans, as social

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Paola Clerici Maestosi, Paolo Civiero and Gilda Massa

r­ealities within Europe differ greatly, depending on
where people live and work. Then the second is that
cities in Europe are and want to be places of advanced
social progress, platforms for democracy, cultural dialogue and diversity as well as places of green, ecological and environmental regeneration. Last but not least
that Smart cities should be regarded as systems able to
catalyze sustainable economic development, resilience
and high quality of life making a strategic use of information and communication infrastructure and/or
­services in a process of transparent urban planning and
management.
Therefore if we refer to the European way to promote
transition towards Smart Cities we could say that it has
been in the last decade that cities started to become
smart, not only because of automatic routine functions
(serving end-users, traffic system and transport, buildings and/or energy providers) already in place, but moreover because data - deriving from ICT applications - have
been used to understand, analyze and, recently, plan the
city to improve efficiency, equity and quality of life for
citizens.
According to this we believe that the transition process which will pave pathways towards smart cities to
come will be mainly focus on setting up, deployment,
roll out and scalability on a set of already existing smart
solutions
Applying smart cities solutions to limited-scale contexts has certainly enabled the testing of SCC technologies, governance models and citizen involvement;
however, what is needed now, in the next future, is to
promote scalability and replicability of solutions, bearing in mind that “there is no single element that represents more than others an obstacle or an enabler to the
roll-out of SCC solutions”.x
For the near future, we need to focus on similarities in
smart cities Research Development & Innovation projects (i.e. paradigmatic or technological enabling factors
on which various solutions are based, ways to integrate
single specific technology in a whole ecosystem of
interoperable solutions,...). If we consider each SCC
solution as a brick of Lego, we understand that while
each brick has been made as a separate object, it needs
to be assembled and integrated in a more structured
system like the one which Smart City paradigm offers.
In next future Smart Cities are approaching a critical
phase: behind many theoretical discussions, it is now
x

 nalysing the potential for wide scale roll-out of integrated SCC solution
A
– Final Report, 2016

necessary to create a realistic pathway of SCC applications/solutions.
This is really the most challenging step of the pathway: it must be more pragmatic, as there will be select
only those SCC solutions which have been experimented
in the conceptual expansion phase. That’s why, in the
near future, urban projects requirements will evolve and
specifications will be more compelling, allowing no
more single, isolated interventions as highly technological islands, but interconnected ones. According to this,
pilot RD&I projects will shortly change: not only a
demonstration of technological effectiveness in achieving the desired performance or KPIs, but competitive
business models with a high level of replicability and
scalability, widely accepted by the largest group of
stakeholders such as RD&I networks, government, real
estate, process management, urban services, design and
construction, e-commerce, analyst, ICT and Big data,
financial/funding, social/civil society,...).
It is a fact that today we still do not have a smart city,
or rather we have a limited-scale smart city context, and
we have several SCC (Smart Cities and Communities)
solutions where the use of ICT infrastructure promotes a
better understanding of success factors for their deployment and roll-out.
Therefore, the next step to move towards a wider
European idea of Smart Cities pass through the idea of
positive energy district for a sustainable urbanization
thanks SCC solutions - already experimented on a limited-scale context; this appears to be the most reliable
opportunity.
Highlights about next European Research
Development & Implementation programme on Smart
Cities and Communities are described in the
Implementation Plan SET-Plan Action 3.2 which focus
on “Europe to become a global role model in integrated,
innovative solutions for the planning, deployment and
replication of Positive Energy District”; the aim is to
support the 100 Positive Energy District by 2025 for a
sustainable urbanization.
The approach to PED will require an open innovation
model for planning, deployment and replication, different
from the one adopted by the Smart Cities paradigm
where tools, technologies and platform have been mainly – designed among several stakeholders
(Governmental, Research and Innovation, Design/
Construction, Real Estate, urban Services, Analyst, IT
project and Big data, Social/Civil Society, Municipality ).
In next future Cities and Municipalities will be the stakeholders who need to take a leading role in the integrated

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

19

European Union funding Research Development and Innovation projects on Smart Cities: the state of the art in 2019

and holistic planning of PEDs, aligning it with their longterm urban strategies, while all the others stakeholders
(mentioned above) will play the vital role as solutions
providers as well as Citizens will take a new role as prosumers with active participation.
Acknowledgement

References

20

[3]

[4]

This article is a part of the EERA Joint Programme on
Smart Cities’ Special issue on Tools, technologies and
systems integration for the Smart and Sustainable Cities
to come [5].

[1]

[2]

[5]

3D’H2020’)%20AND%20lighthouse’)&p=1&num=10&
srt=contentUpdateDate:decreasing
SCIS, EU https://smartcities-infosystem.eu/scc-lighthouseprojects
European structural and investment funds, EU https://
cohesiondata.ec.europa.eu/2014-2020/ESIF-2014-2020FINANCES-PLANNED-DETAILS/e4v6-qrrq
The making of Smart Cities: best practice across Europe, EU
Smart Cities Information System, Empowering Smart Solutions
for better cities, DG Energy, 2017
Østergaard PA, Maestosi PC. Tools, technologies and systems
integration for the Smart and Sustainable Cities to come. Int J
Sustain Energy Plan Manag 2019;24 2019. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5278/ijsepm.3450

Cordis, EU https://cordis.europa.eu/search/en?q=contenttype%
3D’project’%20AND%20(programme%2Fcode%

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

