smart cities
Article

From a Comprehensive Pool to a Project-Specific List
of Key Performance Indicators for Monitoring
the Positive Energy Transition of Smart Cities—An
Experience-Based Approach
Komninos Angelakoglou 1, *, Konstantinos Kourtzanidis 1 , Paraskevi Giourka 1 ,
Vasilis Apostolopoulos 1 , Nikos Nikolopoulos 1 and Julia Kantorovitch 2
1

2

*

Chemical Process and Energy Resources Institute, Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, Thermi,
GR-57001 Thessaloniki, Greece; kourtzanidis@certh.gr (K.K.); giourka@certh.gr (P.G.);
v.apostolopoulos@certh.gr (V.A.); n.nikolopoulos@certh.gr (N.N.)
Technical Research Centre of Finland, Smart Industry, Vuorimiehentie 3, 02044 Espoo, Finland;
julia.kantorovitch@vtt.fi
Correspondence: angelakoglou@certh.gr

Received: 10 June 2020; Accepted: 12 July 2020; Published: 14 July 2020




Abstract: As cities grow rapidly and energy needs increase, shaping an effective energy transition
is a top priority towards urban sustainability and smart development. This study attempts to
answer three key research questions that can help city authorities, planners and interested agents
simplify and increase the transparency of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) selection for smart
city and communities (SCC) projects focusing on energy transition and creation of Positive Energy
Districts (PEDs): Question 1: “What resources are available for extracting such KPIs?”; Question 2:
“Which of those KPIs are the most suitable for assessing the energy transition of smart city projects
and PED-related developments?” and Question 3: “How can a project-specific shortlist of KPIs be
developed?”. Answering these questions can also serve as a major first step towards a “universal” KPI
selection procedure. In line with this purpose, an experiential approach is presented, capitalizing on
knowledge and lessons learned from an ongoing smart city project in Europe (POCITYF) that focuses
on PED deployment. Under this framework, a) a review of smart city KPI frameworks has been
conducted, resulting in a pool of 258 indicators that can potentially be adopted by smart city projects;
b) eight key dimensions of evaluations were extracted, setting a holistic performance framework
relevant to SCCs; c) a detailed evaluation process including pre-determined criteria and city-needs
feedback was applied to shortlist the KPI pool, leading to a ready-to-be-used, project-specific list
of 63 KPIs and d) KPIs were sorted and analyzed in different granularity levels to further facilitate
the monitoring procedure. The experiential procedure presented in this study can be easily adapted
to the needs of every smart city project, serving as a recommendation guide.
Keywords: assessment; monitoring; KPI; PED; performance; selection

1. Introduction
Cities account for two-thirds of global energy consumption and about 75% of worldwide CO2
emissions [1]. Air pollution and traffic congestion as well as climate change contribute to detrimental
effects and pose a huge stress on cities. Air pollution is responsible for an estimated 7 million premature
deaths a year, while over 90% of the world’s population is exposed to toxic air [2]. Traffic congestion in
cities has also recorded a global rise during the last decade [3]. As a consequence, in the last decade,
several targets in terms of cutting greenhouse gases and pollutant emissions were set worldwide,
Smart Cities 2020, 3, 705–735; doi:10.3390/smartcities3030036

www.mdpi.com/journal/smartcities

Smart Cities 2020, 3

706

aiming at tackling climate change and achieving better ambient air quality in cities, e.g., The Paris
Agreement, 2015 [4], and the recent European Green Deal, 2019 [5]. The European Green Deal provides
a holistic framework for resource efficiency, clean and circular economy, low environmental impact
and pollution reduction towards climate neutrality by 2050 in EU, while also giving recommendations
for investments and funding mechanisms available enabling a just transition.
In order to combat these challenges, smart city projects can greatly contribute towards a sustainable
urbanization aligned with global targets but also with each city’s vision and strategic needs. Cities
around the world leverage smart city projects to demonstrate novel solutions, initiatives and activities
required to support the operation of a sustainable, smart and resilient city in terms of climate change
and safety risks, digital services, and smart energy and transport management and better quality of
life in urban places [6]. Advancements in information and communication technologies (ICT) facilitate
the transformation of local energy systems and the transportation sector and the provision of novel
services for the benefit of the citizens. Due to the increasing energy needs and deriving concerns (e.g.,
local grid stability, energy system flexibility, etc.) a smart city is evolved into a well-performing city
that can leverage and connect ICT, energy and mobility with the physical infrastructure, the citizenry
and businesses to enhance its smartness, livability, sustainability and prosperity.
In Europe, the smart city concept is based to a large extent on innovation and green investment
opportunities, whereas a special emphasis has been given, during the last years, to the deployment of
Positive Energy Districts (PEDs). A transition of the urban environment based on the deployment
of PEDs, regarded as the instruments for the intersection among the ICT, local energy and mobility
systems, will facilitate energy transition in smart cities. These demonstrations at the district scale
should be enabled by technological as well as citizen-driven innovation, integrated planning and
management as well as policy and decision-making, considering economic, environmental and social
aspects. Europe attempts to exploit the progress made in technology pertaining to decarbonization,
decentralization and digitalization of energy systems as a great opportunity to facilitate energy
transition [7]. However, supporting the development of smart cities requires more than demonstrating
solutions in order to deliver benefits for cities from positive energy transformation projects. Research
methods and assessments are required in view of monitoring measures, evaluating contributions and
focusing on achieving results from the solutions and activities, optimizing the potential for scalability,
benchmarking, replication and dissemination of good practices and solutions on a wider scale.
The ability to evaluate a positive energy transformation project facilitates the successful tracking of its
progress and outcomes but also allows determining the overall value of the smart solution implemented
and marks whether the solution has made a difference [8]. This is crucial in smart city projects where
a multitude of heterogenous solutions are applied in different spatial scales (building, block, district, and
city levels). Smart city projects, as the instruments of stakeholder perspectives and decision-making in
a city, should showcase the progress made in key sectors related with city needs and contribute actively
to the priorities and objectives set by cities. For this purpose, the development and selection of indicators
for measuring the smartness of a city and the effectiveness of a project are critical [9].
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) can act as a universal instrument to evaluate the progress of
strategies towards positive energy transformation supporting the monitoring of relevant solutions
and projects [10]. According to the Oxford dictionary, the definition of a KPI is “a quantifiable
measure used to evaluate the success of an organization, employee, etc. in meeting objectives for
performance”. The key difference between KPIs and other indicators is that KPIs are always tied to
a goal, a target or an objective [11]. The development of smart city projects generates considerable
interest in establishing novel smart city assessment frameworks and schemes measuring, monitoring
and evaluating performance and impacts and addressing possible challenges, before and during
the whole life-cycle and after the project implementation [12]. In this context, several initiatives
propose different monitoring and assessment KPI frameworks for smart city solutions promoting
the cooperation and exchanging of know-how among smart cities (described in detail in Section 2).
The selection of the most appropriate KPIs for smart city projects remains difficult though, as it requires

Smart Cities 2020, 3

707

expert knowledge [13]. Hundreds of KPIs are available, and the choice of the most suitable ones for
each case is a challenging task. Given the fact that the smart city concept entails numerous interrelated
dimensions, the process of evaluation through KPIs is challenging because, on the one hand, it should
satisfy city needs, while on the other hand, it should allow an effective comparison on a national or
international level with other cities or smart city projects. In the end, every smart city project adopts
its own KPI list, which makes the inter-comparison of the outcomes among different projects and
solutions problematic, indicating the need for a uniform monitoring of the energy smartification and
smart city solutions [14].
With a view to address the above-mentioned challenges, this study attempts to answer three key
research questions that can help city authorities, planners and interested agents simplify and increase
the transparency of KPI selection for smart city projects having as a core focus the energy transition:
Question 1: “What resources are available for extracting such KPIs?”; Question 2: “Which of those KPIs
are the most suitable for assessing the energy transition of smart city projects and PED-related
developments?” and Question 3: “How can a project-specific shortlist of KPIs be developed?”.
Answering these questions can also serve as a major first step towards the unification of the KPI
selection procedure. In line with this purpose, an experiential approach is presented, capitalizing on
knowledge and lessons learned from POCITYF [15], a European H2020 recently funded smart city
project, which orchestrates the demonstration activities towards energy transition at two Lighthouse
cities (LHs)—Evora in Portugal and Alkmaar in the Netherlands; as well as the replication of this list
in six Fellow Cities (FCs)—Bari in Italy, Celje in Slovenia, Granada in Spain, Hvidovre in Denmark,
Ioannina in Greece and Ujpest in Hungary. POCITYF brings together 53 partners (54% of which are
industries and SMEs) from 13 European countries to demonstrate 73 individual innovative elements
(technologies, tools, methods) in more than 20 building complexes covering a total floor area of 87,480
m2 with current energy needs of 13.25GWh/year. The positive energy transformation of buildings
(Positive Energy Buildings—PEBs) and districts (see below) based on innovative solutions to be
integrated therein, is a core goal of POCITYF which pertains to all Lighthouse (especially Evora)
and Fellow cities. The focus on PEDs is essential for POCITYF but also for any smart city vision
and requires integration and interaction among various stakeholders and technologies, taking into
account spatial, social, economic and regulatory perspectives. PEDs can be seen as districts with
annual net-zero energy imports, and net-zero CO2 emission working towards an annual local surplus
production of renewable energy [16]. The creation of PEDs in POCITYF includes interventions such
as advanced solar energy technologies, flexible electrical and thermal grids, energy management
and peer-to-peer (P2P) transactions, ICT integration, e-mobility and citizen engagement towards an
open-innovation ecosystem. Moreover, Evora LH and most of the Fellow Cities present a unique
challenge: cultural heritage buildings and districts require further innovations towards their energy
transition. As a result, ensuring a functional and efficient monitoring procedure for POCITYF is
a challenge and of critical importance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a detailed analysis of available
smart city KPI frameworks. The aim of the specific section is twofold: a) examine and assess existing KPI
frameworks relevant to smart cities and extract valuable ideas, lessons learned and suggestions; b)
develop an extensive and comprehensive pool of potential KPIs that could be utilized in smart cities
projects building upon the recommendations of these frameworks. Outcomes in Section 2 answer
the research question no 1. Section 3 presents a step-by-step process for evaluating and selecting KPIs
in a transparent way, building upon the experiences of POCITYF and capitalizing the results from
the analysis performed in Section 2. Outcomes in Section 3 answer the research question no 2. Section 4
presents the results of implementing the proposed process in the case of POCITYF, serving as a potential
“ready-to-be-used” set of KPIs. This can also serve as an extra step towards utilizing common KPIs in
smart city projects thus facilitating their inter-comparison. Further analysis is performed in Section 4
providing insights on how the KPI selection and implementation can be improved. Outcomes in
Section 4 answer the research question no 3.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

708

2. A Review of Smart City KPI Frameworks
As smart city projects are in bloom around the world, supported by relevant policies and
initiatives, there is need to monitor the performance of smart city solutions implemented in order
to verify whether the targets set are being achieved and to what extent. Monitoring of smart city
projects would then facilitate an informed reflection towards optimizing solutions and increasing
the levels of their efficiency. Many initiatives are proposing different monitoring and assessment
frameworks for smart city solutions promoting the cooperation and exchanging of know-how among
smart cities. This study explores different monitoring frameworks proposed by a variety of sources.
The Smart Cities Information System (SCIS) and the CITYkeys project have both created platforms of
interaction and propose lists of KPIs for evaluating systems and technologies demonstrated specifically
for smart city projects in the EU. Several Smart Cities and Communities Lighthouse projects as well
as international and European standards (e.g., ISO 37120:2018, ISO 37123:2019) and strategic plans
and initiatives e.g., UN’s Sustainable Development Goals, are also providing indicators for assessing
the performance of smart city solutions. Finally, there are several assessment frameworks available
in scientific journals that attempt to evaluate smart city performance of solutions at different levels.
The sources presented in the paper have been chosen based on their scientific merit and publishing
date (for scientific publications) in order to include recent studies in this theme. In terms of KPI
frameworks and SCC projects, the criteria for selecting the presented databases were the wide usage,
acceptance and diffusivity of frameworks and success as well as relevance (to energy transition) of
the SCC projects. Literature documents with duplicated or very similar information to another source
have been excluded from the final (presented) list of references.
The rest of Section 2 below, provides a comprehensive summary of these various sources offering
a versatile set of assessment frameworks and KPIs.
2.1. Smart Cities Information System (SCIS) and CITYkeys
The SCIS KPI framework (2018) [17] focuses on indicators which assess technical and economic
aspects of energy, mobility and ICT-related measures applicable in projects such as Smart Cities and
Communities (SCC), Energy-Efficient Buildings (EeB) and designated projects funded under the calls
for Energy Efficiency (EE). Due to the complexity and variety of the projects in scope, the indicators are
proposed to be calculated for different granularity levels (building, set of buildings, energy supply unit,
set of energy supply units, neighborhood). Some of the KPIs at the upper levels can be calculated from
simple addition of the lower levels, while some other KPIs are specific to each level. The SCIS KPI guide
provides a description of Key Performance Indicators and their application to the different objects of
assessment, it identifies the data requirements for their calculation and describes the methodology for
the calculation of these indicators. The SCIS framework focuses on demonstration projects and not on
entire cities and consists of 36 indicators.
The CITYkeys evaluation framework [11] is primarily a performance-oriented framework and
supports Smart Cities in evaluating the success of smart city projects. The framework indicates
the difference the project has made by offering the opportunity to compare the situation before and
after a smart city project is implemented. As such, it can also serve to benchmark projects against
each other. It also helps monitor the progress of the city as a whole towards smart city goals, taking
into account the time component—“development over the years”. It focuses on the city as well as
the project level while establishing a link between the two. The city indicators show to what extent
overall policy goals have been reached or are within reach. In addition, city-level indicators may be
used to compare cities with each other. It also assesses how the project has contributed to the objectives
at city level. This requires connecting outcomes of a project evaluation with corresponding indicators
on the city level, while it also assesses the possibility to replicate the (successful) projects in other
contexts. A complete project assessment includes an extensive description of the context of the project,
the activities and technologies in the project, financing and the business model, and the implementation

Smart Cities 2020, 3

709

process. CITYkeys framework supports the identification of indicators in various areas in smart cities
i.e., health, education, etc. The framework consists of 99 project indicators and 76 city-level indicators.
2.2. Other Positive Energy Transformation Projects
Other smart city projects also provide comprehensive community knowledge and stakeholder
perceptions for the evaluation of smart city projects. Until recently, there are 17 SCC lighthouse (LH)
projects in Europe [18], with a total of 44 LH Cities and 70 Fellow Cities that demonstrate solutions in
the three (3) main fields of a) secure, affordable and clean energy; b) smart e-mobility and c) smart ICT
tools and services.
In the context of city performance measurement and assessment, 10 projects were identified out
of the 17 that were examined that capitalize on a complete evaluation process of smart city solutions
with a detailed list of KPIs publicly available (the rest of the projects have either not completed this
process or made their KPIs publicly available yet). To this end, the KPI frameworks of those projects
were examined thoroughly and are also taken into account in our analysis in order to serve as potential
sources for POCITYF’s KPI list. Each of them adopts a special assessment framework to evaluate
smart city performance and expected impacts. Emphasis should be given to the fact that, despite their
differences, those frameworks also have similarities in their approaches, taking various definitions or
units resulting in numerous common-adopted KPIs. Table 1 summarizes the key characteristics of
these assessment frameworks, developed to evaluate and monitor performance of smart city projects.
Table 1. Indicative assessment frameworks by EC-funded LH projects.
Project Name

Assessment Framework

IRIS
Integrated and
Replicable Solutions for
Co-Creation In
Sustainable Cities
Ref. [19]

The assessment framework uses an agile and holistic approach defining a set of
75 KPIs categorized in six (6) dimensions—technical, environmental, economic,
social, ICT and legal—along with a targeted clustering of solutions in five (5)
Transition Tracks as follows: TT#1-Smart renewables and closed-loop
energy-positive districts, TT#2- Smart Energy Management and Storage for Grid
Flexibility, TT#3-Smart e-Mobility Sector, TT#4-City Innovation Platforms (CIP) and
TT#5-Citizen Engagement and Co-Creation. Indicative calculated thresholds for
scalar quantification and monitoring performance of the solutions through
the assessment criteria are also proposed.

REPLICATE
Renaissance of Places
with Innovative
Citizenship and
Technologies
Ref. [20]

The proposed KPI framework contains a total of 56 KPIs classified under seven (7)
dimensions covering as a whole city performance; City description (5 indicators),
Energy and Environment (14 indicators), Mobility and Transport (14 indicators),
Infrastructure (6 indicators), Governance (5 indicators), Social (5 indicators), and
Economy and Finance (7 indicators). The indicators are further analyzed into three
evaluation/applicability levels; a) National/ Regional, b) Local / City, c) District.

MATCHUP Maximizing
the Upscaling and
replication potential of
high-level urban
transformation strategies.
Ref. [21]

MatchUp’s evaluation framework is based on the concept of sustainable
development, including two (2) evaluation levels (city level and project level) and
a total of 188 indicators. The indicators have been classified under three (3)
dimensions, namely environment, economy and social, and grouped into four (4)
fields of implementation activities: a) Energy Efficiency in Buildings and Districts,
b) Mobility/Transport, c) ICT and Urban Platforms and d) Citizens and Society,
along with some additional indicators related to Governance.

SMARTEnCITY
Towards Smart Zero CO2
Cities across Europe
Ref. [22]

The evaluation framework was developed considering the type of implemented
solutions within the project; district renovation, urban mobility and citizen
engagement; adopting indicators grouped into four (4) categories—technical,
environmental, social and economic—and determining five (5) evaluation
protocols—Energy Assessment, ICT, LCA, Mobility and Cross-Cutting. A list
of KPIs for each category (technical, environmental, social, and economic) and by
type of intervention (district renovation, mobility and citizen engagement) is
provided, with a total of 149 indicators.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

710

Table 1. Cont.
Project Name

MySMARTLIFE Smart
Transition of EU cities
towards a new concept
of Smart Life and
Economy
Ref. [23]

Assessment Framework
The presented evaluation framework defines a total of 151 KPIs classified across six
(6) fields—Energy and Environment, Mobility and Transport, Urban Infrastructure,
Citizens, Economy and Governance—while at the same time adopting the five (5)
major themes of CITYkeys (People, Planet, Prosperity, Governance and
Propagation). Expected impacts are grouped into five (5) specific categories: energy,
environmental, economic, social and policy impacts. The framework adopts
a twofold evaluation approach in order to measure the demonstration activities:
project level (i.e., demonstration areas) and city level. City-level evaluation is
strongly related to the overall smart city concept, aiming to identify the main
challenges of the cities with city indicators and audits, while at the project level,
the target is to assess the effects of the project actions in the demo sites with regards
to project pillars.

SHARINGCITIES
Building Smart Cities
Together
Ref. [24]

The proposed framework attempts to deliver the effects of
the People/Place/Platform (PPP) measures in this project, setting evaluation targets
categorized into six (6) domains: a) technical performance; b) attitudes and
behaviors; c) wider systemic and environmental impacts; d) security, safety and
sustainability; e) institutional and business consequences and f) economic and
social implications. Key targets concern the “Place” demonstrations, which consist
of four different fields: Building Retrofit and Local RES Generation, Sustainable
Energy Management Systems, Shared e-Mobility, Smart Lampposts. In this context,
the framework is structured around a final set of 127 KPIs.

TRIANGULUM
The Three Point Project /
Demonstrate.
Disseminate. Replicate.
Ref. [25]

The project introduces a monitoring and impact assessment framework based on
a seven-stage methodology for defining expected impacts, resulting in a total of 79
indicators relevant to the following five (5) impact domains: Energy, Transport,
Citizen Engagement, Socio-economic/financial and ICT deployment; aligned also
well with both the preferred metrics and the respective commitments of the cities.
The framework of this project provides an extensive background as to how cities
gather data on energy and transport.

GROWSMARTER
Transforming Cities for
a Smart, Sustainable
Europe
Ref. [26]

The assessment framework of the project is grounded on three (3) main dimensions
which are the categories of the project interventions—better quality of life,
environmental and economic–including also various sub-domains and
agreed-upon relevant goals, leading to the definition of 104 indicators to measure
and evaluate project/city performance. The first category, Low Energy Districts, is
divided also into two sub-categories: Building Evaluation and Local Evaluation.

+CityxChange
Positive City ExChange
Ref. [27]

STARDUST
Enlightening European
Cities
Ref. [28]

The specific evaluation framework builds upon a holistic approach including KPIs
from SCIS focusing on technical and economic aspects of energy-related measures,
as well as KPIs specifically defined for the project to measure unique interventions
and social impact of the project on citizens. The KPI framework is divided into
the three (3) core themes: a) Integrated Planning and Design (IPD), including KPIs
measuring the impact of larger interventions to set up tools and regulations for
planning purposes; b) Common Energy Market (CEM), regarding aspects of
interventions changed due to ongoing roll-out or evolution of the project and c)
CommunityxChange (CxC), measuring the effect on public participation in energy
efficiency initiatives. The evaluation framework process results in a sum of 33 KPIs.
The framework structure proposes a set of 17 indicators to monitor and assess
the performance of the project solutions across five (5) diverse clusters; Building
and Energy, e-Mobility, ICT, Common City Level and Long-Term Effects.
The monitoring of the project is based on i) Immediate progress evaluated through
concrete output indicators; ii) Achieved impacts assessed by impact indicators and
iii) Long-term effects evaluated through scalability of the solutions implemented
based in the LH cities, Fellow Cities and their replication potential in other cities in
Europe.

2.3. Scientific Publications
Apart from relevant projects, scientific studies are also available introducing various assessment
frameworks that attempt to evaluate smart city performance at various levels. The scientific search

Smart Cities 2020, 3

711

engines and online databases indexed in Hellenic Academic Library Link (HEAL-Link) were utilized
for identifying relevant works. HEAL-Link provides access to various scientific databases (i.e., Scopus,
Science Direct), covering a significant range of journals in this field. Initially, a quick search was
performed with the application of keywords regarding the scope of the paper, i.e., “smart cities” AND
“KPI”, “smart cities” AND “assessment” and so forth. The abstracts of the most relevant papers based
on their title were further examined. Table 2 lists the relevant frameworks selected. In order to narrow
down the vast number of potential frameworks that could be included in this table, only holistic
frameworks that can assess various aspects of smartness were included e.g., papers only dealing with
mobility or ICT were excluded from the analysis, whereas specific KPIs should be clearly presented.
The methods that passed the initial filtering process were further reviewed (full paper review).
KPIs included in the above-mentioned frameworks (375 KPIs in total) can further help
the population of the energy-related smart city KPI pool. The authors are aware that this list is
not exhaustive and that there are several other potential scientific publications that could be included
in this analysis. It was imperative though, to keep the KPI pool in a level that is both comprehensive
and analyzable.
Table 2. Indicative KPI frameworks assessing positive energy transformation intervention actions from
scientific sources.
Source

Assessment Framework

Angelakoglou et al.
(2019) [14]

Angelakoglou et al. introduce a smart city KPI framework after applying a six
(6)-step approach for determining the KPI repository. The 75 KPIs identified are
able to evaluate both business-as-usual and novel technologies and services related
to smart city solutions. The repository is categorized into six (6) dimensions
(technical, environmental, economic, social, ICT and legal KPIs) and provides
indicative thresholds for monitoring performance. This framework was built upon
the experiences gained during the implementation of the IRIS SCC project and
integrates relevant stakeholder points of view concerning the deployment of smart
city solutions.

Akande et al. (2019)
[29]

Akande et al. propose a framework for assessing and ranking cities based on how
smart and sustainable they are. Hierarchical clustering and principal component
analysis (PCA) are applied to select and cluster 32 KPIs into three (3) thematic areas:
a) Economy (7 KPIs) b) Environment (12 KPIs) and c) Society and Culture
(13 KPIs). KPIs included in this framework are mostly fitted to assess smartness
aspects on a city level.

Huovila et al. (2019)
[13]

Huovila et al. compare seven recently published indicator standards for smart and
sustainable cities (ISO 37120:2018, ISO/DIS 37122:2018, ETSI TS 103463, ITU-T
Y.4901, 4902, 4903, SDG 11+ monitoring framework). A taxonomy was developed
to evaluate 413 indicators against five conceptual urban focuses (types of urban
sustainability and smartness), ten sectoral application domains (energy, transport,
ICT, economy, etc.) and five indicator types (input, process, output, outcome,
impact). The results clearly discriminate between indicator standards suited for
evaluating the implementation of predominantly smart city approaches versus
standards more focused on sustainability assessment. As within this study most of
the KPI frameworks identified by Huovila et al. are already examined, and
emphasis was mostly on ITU-T KPIs and the taxonomy developed.

Tan et al. (2017) [30]

Tan et al. propose an indicator framework for the assessment of smart cities putting
emphasis on low-carbon city aspects. A total of 20 KPIs are separated into seven (7)
assessment categories: a) Energy pattern, b) Water, c) Social and living, d) Carbon
and environment, e) Solid waste, f) Urban mobility and g) Economic.
The framework also provides benchmarking values that allow intercomparisons
among cities’ performance.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

712

Table 2. Cont.
Source

Assessment Framework

Girardi and
Temporelli (2017) [31]

Girardi and Temporelli propose a new methodological approach, called
Smartainability, that is able to estimate using quantitative and qualitative KPIs
the extent to which smart cities are more sustainable (and smart) due to
the deployment of innovative technologies. The assessment is performed prior to
the application of the respective technologies. The methodology was built upon
the Guidelines for conducting a cost–benefit analysis of Smart Grid projects, a study
made by European Commission JRC, and Smart Cities—Ranking of European
medium-sized cities, realized by Vienna University of Technology, University of
Ljubljana and Delft University of Technology. Four (4) dimensions of analysis are
applied: a) Environment, b) Economy, c) Energy and d) Living. The methodology
was validated at a district level (Expo Milano 2015 site). Further recommendations
are available for the implementation at a city level, including a set of 28 KPIs and
a new dimension—People—which evaluates the community life improvement.

Dall’O et al. (2017)
[32]

Dall’O et al. provide a method for assessing the smartness of a city through a set of
indicators focusing on small and medium-sized cities and communities. The KPIs
selected are consistent with the ISO 37120 standard and are inspired by
the environmental indicators included in Sustainable Energy Action Plans under
the Covenant of Mayors Initiative. A total of 70 KPIs are structured around seven
(7) evaluation areas: a) smart economy (7 KPIs), b) smart energy (12 KPIs), c) smart
environment (6 KPIs), d) smart governance (12 KPIs), e) smart living (17 KPIs), f)
smart people (8 KPIs) and g) smart mobility (8 KPIs).

Li et al. (2017)
[33]

Li et al. propose a systematic approach, utilizing a bi-index method, to identify
stakeholders and KPIs for multi-level (from building to district) energy
performance analysis. KPIs are analyzed into three (3) levels: strategic, tactical and
operational. The strategic KPI is aggregated and designed for the district level.
The tactical KPI can be associated with the building and system level.
The operational KPIs represent the operational performance of basic energy units.
Although this study does not focus directly on smart city projects, it offers 35
specific performance indicators that can serve the goals of smart city solutions
focusing on energy performance.

Hara et al. (2016) [34]

Hara et al. propose a set of KPIs for smart cities based on the Gross Social
Feel-Good Index. The KPIs are structured upon four (4) layers: a) the 1st layer
includes the triple bottom line (Environment, Economy, Society) and Satisfaction
generic categories; b) in the 2nd layer, the Society category is further split into safety,
health and comfort; c) the 3rd layer includes a total of 16 KPIs utilized to assess
the 2nd layer (environment/natural resource, energy, cost performance, accident,
natural disaster, crime, information security, health management, prevention of
illness, medical treatment, stress, diverse opportunities, barrier-free, simplicity,
ubiquitous, and citizen’s degree of satisfaction) and d) the 4th layer includes
the data needed (52 sub-KPIs) to calculate the KPIs in the 3rd layer.

Lombardi et al.
(2012) [35]

Lombardi et al. introduce a framework for classifying smart city performance
indicators building upon the quadruple helix model (Civil society, University,
Government and Industry) and utilizing the Analytic Network Process. A total of
63 KPIs are proposed, organized into five (5) clusters: a) smart governance (related
to participation)—7 KPIs, b) smart human capital (related to people)—12 KPIs; c)
smart environment (related to natural resources)—19 KPIs; d) smart living (related
to quality of life)—13 KPIs and e) smart economy (related to
competitiveness)—12 KPIs.

2.4. Other Relevant Frameworks and Initiatives
A versatile pool of other sources, such as international strategic planning initiatives, agreements
and reviews as well as international and European standards also propose relevant frameworks for
monitoring and evaluation of smart city solutions.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

713

2.4.1. UN’s Global Indicator Framework for the Sustainable Development Goals
The Inter-Agency and Expert Group on SDG Indicators (IAEG-SDGs) developed the UN’s Global
indicator framework, refined March 2017, for assessing the Sustainable Development Goals [36] and
targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Adopted by all United Nations Member
States in 2015, the SDGs are a call for action by all countries to promote prosperity while protecting
the environment. The framework includes 232 indicators, and the indicators are categorized in relation
to the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)—the world’s plan to build a better world for people
and our planet by 2030. All EU countries have adopted the SDGs, and as such the framework provides
an interesting database of KPIs relevant to smart city solutions. In this respect, 61 KPIs in total, related
to the SDGs Goals 7—“Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all”
(6 KPIs), Goal 8—”Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive
employment and decent work for all” (17 KPIs), Goal 9—“Build resilient infrastructure, promote
inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation” (12 KPIs), Goal 11—“Make cities
and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable” (15 KPIs) and Goal 12—“Ensure
sustainable consumption and production patterns” (11 KPIs) are linked to the energy transition of
smart cities and are therefore taken into consideration.
2.4.2. United for Smart Sustainable Cities (U4SSC) Initiative
The “United for Smart Sustainable Cities” (U4SSC) is a UN initiative coordinated by ITU, UNECE
and UN-Habitat to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 11—”Make cities and human settlements
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable”. A set of 91 KPIs under U4SSC [37] have been developed to
establish the criteria to evaluate ICT’s contributions in making cities smarter and more sustainable,
and to provide cities with the means for self-assessments. The indicators are categorized into three
dimensions: Economy, Environment, and Society and Culture. Within each dimension, sub-dimensions
provide focus on more specific areas of performance and progress. Intelligent use of ICT (through
innovative City Information Platforms, Energy/mobility management, DSM, smart monitoring, etc.) is
a core element of Smart City objectives linked to energy considerations.
2.4.3. ISO/FDIS 37122—Indicators for Smart Cities
ISO, the International Organization for Standardization, is a worldwide federation of national
standards bodies (ISO member bodies). The indicators detailed in ISO 37120 have become
the international reference point for sustainable cities. ISO/TC 268/WG2 experts have identified
the need for additional indicators for smart cities. ISO 37122 [38] complements ISO 37120 (see 2.4.4)
and establishes indicators considering aspects and practices that dramatically increase the pace at
which cities improve their social, economic and environmental sustainability outcomes. The 80 KPIs
identified are clustered under 23 categories: Economy, Education, Energy, Environmental and Climate
Change, Finance, Governance, Health, Housing, Population and Social Conditions, Recreation,
Safety, Solid Waste, Sport and Culture, Telecommunications, Transportation, Urban/local Agriculture
and Food Security, Urban Planning, Wastewater and Water. Concerning energy transition of
Smart Cities, the relevant KPI categories studied are Economy/Finance (6 KPIs), Energy (10 KPIs),
Environment and Climate Change (3 KPIs), Governance (4 KPIs), Housing (2 KPIs), Solid Waste
(6 KPIs), Telecommunication (3 KPIs), Transportation (14 KPIs) and Urban planning (4 KPIs), summing
up to a total number of 52 KPIs to be studied within this work.
2.4.4. ISO/FDIS 37120—Indicators for City Services and Quality of Life
The indicator framework of ISO 37120 [39] focuses on city services and quality of life as
a contribution to the sustainability of the city. In more detail, the indicators included in ISO
37120 have been developed to help cities a) measure performance management of city services and
quality of life over time, b) learn from one another by allowing comparison across a wide range

Smart Cities 2020, 3

714

of performance measures and c) support policy development and priority setting. The 111 Key
Performance Indicators identified by the framework are clustered under the same 23 themes as in
ISO 37122: Economy, Education, Energy, Environmental and Climate Change, Finance, Governance,
Health, Housing, Population and Social Conditions, Recreation, Safety, Solid Waste, Sport and Culture,
Telecommunications, Transportation, Urban/local Agriculture and Food Security, Urban Planning,
Wastewater and Water. Similarly to ISO 37122, the relevant categories are Economy (9 KPIs), Energy
(8 KPIs), Environment and Climate Change (9 KPIs), Finance (5 KPIs), Governance (4 KPIs), Housing
(5 KPIs), Solid Waste (10 KPIs), Telecommunication (2 KPIs), Transportation (8 KPIs) and Urban
planning (5 KPIs), summing up to a total number of 65 KPIs to be studied within this work.
2.4.5. ETSI Technical Specification on KPIs for “Sustainable Digital Multiservice Cities”
In Europe, the standardization activities on Smart sustainable cities are coordinated by a joint
effort between CEN, CENELEC and ETSI on the Sector Forum on Smart and Sustainable Cities and
Communities (SF-SSCC), created in January 2017, and following the work of a similar coordination
group [40,41]. There is one set of smart sustainable city indicators that has been published by ETSI in
the form of a technical specification on Key Performance Indicators for “Sustainable Digital Multiservice
Cities” [42,43]. These indicators were originally defined by the European CITYkeys initiative, together
with European cities, based on the analysis of 20 cities’ needs, 43 existing indicator frameworks and
feasibility testing by approximately 50 cities and other stakeholders. The indicators are arranged in an
extended triple bottom line sustainability framework, including the themes people, planet, prosperity,
governance and propagation, and completed with specific smart city indicators. Under the main
themes, subthemes conforming to major policy ambitions have been identified. Under these subthemes,
in total, 73 city indicators in different categories have been selected. The selection has been based on
an inventory of 43 existing indicator frameworks for cities indicators. The majority of the indicators
in the ICT have been derived from existing indicator frameworks, while new indicators have been
suggested to fill gaps in existing frameworks. The relevant categories for this work are related to
Planet (energy and mitigation, climate resilience, pollution and waste), Prosperity (jobs creation, green
economy, innovation) and Governance (organization and community involvement).
3. Proposed Evaluation Methodology for Selecting KPIs
The research methodology applied in this study builds upon an extended variety of frameworks
and initiatives identified and presented in Section 2, with a view to capitalize on experiences and
lessons learned but also to further increase the transparency and objectivity of the selection process. An
iterative approach is adopted in this study, requiring the active involvement of various stakeholders
during the development of the final KPI list. Additionally, a solid KPI evaluation process is applied,
including specific criteria and a scoring system to achieve having a shortlist of KPIs. The experiential
procedure presented below reflects the needs of lighthouse cities to meet their energy efficiency
goals but can be easily adapted to the needs of every smart city project. The following sections
present the procedure followed for identifying the POCITYF KPIs in a more generic way, serving as
a recommendation guide. This section further aims to answer the second research question “Which of
the KPIs used in the reviewed frameworks are the most suitable for assessing the energy transition
of smart city projects?” as well as the third research question “How can a project-specific shortlist
of KPIs be developed?”. The authors understand though, that not all cities have the capacity and
the resources to conduct such detailed analyses. For that reason, detailed results deriving from
the implementation of the recommended methodology in POCITYF (relating again to the third research
question as a project-specific use case), are presented in Section 4 and can potentially be used as
a “ready-to-be-used” set of KPIs. This can also serve as an extra step towards utilizing common KPIs
in smart city projects, thus facilitating their benchmarking.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

715

3.1. Dimensions Definition for Indicator Analysis
Before proceeding with the identification of potential indicators that can serve the needs of a smart
city, there is a need to define which are the most prevalent dimensions— parameters that need to
be considered for efficiently assessing and monitoring energy-efficiency targeting solutions. This
process helps to ensure that relevant KPIs, which cover all aspects affecting the sustainable energy
transition of smart cities, will be selected. Table 3 summarizes the different dimensions identified
during the analysis conducted in Section 2. It should be mentioned that for similar-oriented dimensions
(e.g., planet, environmental, carbon, and climate change; prosperity and economic; social, society,
culture, living, people, and human capital), clustering was applied to provide a more concise overview
of the most frequent dimension. Based on the analysis conducted in Section 2, eight (8) dimensions are
most frequently presented in the inventory of the KPI relevant framework sources identified (Table 3).
The most intensively appearing dimensions are: technical, environmental, economic, ICT, mobility,
social, governance and propagation.
The dimensions of “governance” and “propagation” are the least appearing when compared to
other dimensions in relevant frameworks but are of equal importance in the authors’ opinion since
they seem to be catalyzing the energy transition process. Governance is connected to the current
EU legislative framework, which is not uniform but fragmented across the various EU countries,
reflecting the capacity of the local governments to manage and valorize energy transition opportunities.
The dimension of “propagation” seems to be also of significant importance in smart city projects for
evaluating the potential of scaling-up, dissemination and replication to other locations, other contexts
and other cities while depending on the inherent characteristics of the project but also on external
factors such as market conditions. ICT is also not so frequently presented, but this is mostly due to
the fact that ICT KPIs are embedded within other dimensions.
POCITYF has adopted all eight dimensions towards setting a holistic performance framework,
corresponding with the type of solutions and actions to be implemented. This set of KPI dimensions
allows measuring and to assessing the positive energy transformation achieved by cities while
implementing energy efficiency interventions. We opted to rename the Technical dimension to Energy
as KPIs included under this specific dimension were mostly reflecting energy-related aspects. Table 4
presents the eight dimensions adopted in POCITYF along with a short description and some examples
of relevant KPIs.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

716

Table 3. Total KPIs and key dimensions adopted by smart city KPI frameworks.
Source / KPI Dimensions
SCIS
CITYKeys
UN’s SDGs

Environmental Economic

Technical Social

City
Description

LCA

Urban
Planning

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

52

*

*

65

*

*
*

*

*

*

*

ETSI

*

*

*

*

IRIS

*

*

*

*

REPLICATE

*

*

*

*

MATCHUP

*

*

101
76

*

*
*

*

*

*

*

*

SHARING CITIES

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

+CityxChange

*

*
*

*

Huovila et al. (2019) ITU-T
Y4901/ Y.4902 / Y.4903

*

*

*

*

56

*

151
127

*

79
104

*

*

*

*

*

*
*

*

33
17
32

*

*

Tan et al. (2017)

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Dall’O et al. (2017)

*

*

*

*

*

Hara et al. (2016)

*

*

*

*

*

Lombardi et al. (2012)

*

*

130
20
28

*

*

70

*
*

149
*

*
*

*

*

*

Girardi and Temporelli (2017)

Li et al. (2017)

75

188

*

STARDUST

*

*

*

Akande et al. (2019)

73

*

*

MYSMARTLIFE

*

61

*

*

TRIANGULUM

36

*

91
*

ISO/FDIS 37120

SMARTenCITY

*

Total KPIs

*

*

*

Legal

*

U4SSC

*

Supporting

*

ISO/FDIS 37122

GROWSMARTER

Mobility Governance Propagation ICT

35

*

*

*

*
Total KPIs

* dimensions adopted by the KPI framework.

16
63
1928

Smart Cities 2020, 3

717

Table 4. Dimensions definition for indicator analysis.
KPI Dimension

Description

KPI Examples

Energy

Energy performance is focusing mainly on
the interventions facilitating energy transition.

Energy demand and
consumption; RES
generation ratio; Peak load
reduction

Environmental

Environmental performance is increasingly
important for smart cities striving to identify
environmental risks and factors that are essential
for humans and natural resources and special for
smart city planning and operation.

CO2 emissions reduction;
Air quality, Noise pollution

Economic

Economic performance refers to the business
efficiency and cost of each application and usage
scenario from a market perspective.

Average cost of energy
consumption; Cost savings;
Return on investment

ICT

ICT performance is regarded as a key pillar for
technology advancements in the smart city concept,
enabling data management, privacy and security
and data monitoring for the development of new
innovative services.

Cybersecurity; Data privacy;
Improved interoperability

Mobility

Mobility performance is appropriate for smart city
projects concerning the convergence of energy and
transport sectors, the global EV market uptake and
the increasing citizens’ needs for sustainable
mobility and e-mobility services.

EVs charging points; Clean
mobility utilization;
E-vehicle sharing solutions

Social

Social performance is crucial to estimate the extent
to which the project and its designed collaborative
action model facilitate the involvement of citizens
and social actors in the planning, decision-making
and implementation activities through social
citizen-driven innovation mechanisms.

Citizen participation in
co-creation processes and
online decision making;
Degree of users’ satisfaction

Governance

Governance performance refers to the city
governance from the side of the municipality
administration, planning and evaluation mainly,
but also includes aspects of the legal domain
regarding the regulatory framework and its
compatibility with the proposed solutions and
implemented policies at project or city level.

Involvement of the city
administration;
Legal framework
compatibility; New
rules/regulations due to
the project

Propagation

Propagation performance assesses the potential for
wider scalability and replicability of the solutions
and actions demonstrated.

Social compatibility of
solutions; Market demand;
Diffusion potential

3.2. Screening Process—Development of an Indicator Pool
As a next step, all 1928 indicators included in the KPI frameworks presented in Section 2
were analyzed and assigned to one of the eight defined dimensions. Indicators that: a) had an
unavailable or unclear definition, b) address issues that cannot be significantly and directly affected
by the implementation of the positive energy transformation project (e.g., employment at a national
level) and c) are too technology- or site-specific (e.g., efficiency of a defined type of heat pump) were
excluded from the analysis. The reason for applying this “screening” process is to facilitate the next
step, which includes the detailed evaluation of each indicator by a panel of experts for ensuring that
a filtered pool, including only highly relevant indicators, will be assessed. Moreover, similar indicators
(e.g., using different terminology and/or utilizing different units of measurement) were included only
once in the pool. This highly reduced the total number of indicators included in the pool, since it was
observed that a lot of frameworks were building upon previous frameworks (and especially SCIS),
thus repeating relevant information.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

718

This initial screening process resulted in a pool of 258 indicators that can potentially be adopted
by smart city projects covering the selected dimensions. A more detailed breakdown of the number
of indicators included in each category, as well as further discussion and analytics, is provided in
Section 4. The complete indicator pool is available as Supplementary Material (Table S1).
3.3. Evaluation Process—Towards a Final KPI List
Adopting all the KPIs included in the defined pool would make their monitoring process quite
overwhelming and nearly impossible to be applied in practice. As a result, there is a need to define
a concrete process to narrow down the most appropriate KPIs for inclusion into the final KPI list.
To address this issue, we suggest building upon the selection criteria proposed by the CIVITAS
framework [44] (also adopted by several other projects like CITYkeys, IRIS, etc.) to achieve a shortlist
of indicators. More specifically, the following iterative evaluation process was adopted in the POCITYF
project and is described below.
Initially, every potential KPI included in the pool was assessed using a three-point scoring system
per criterion (0 points: The indicator does not satisfy this criterion adequately; 1 point: The indicator
satisfies this criterion sufficiently; 2 points: The indicator fully satisfies this criterion). The evaluation
was performed by a carefully selected panel of experts (see acknowledgments) who are members of
the POCITYF consortium and have extensive experience and expertise in technology and in the design
of positive energy transformation developments while they also oversee POCITYF implementation.
The criteria applied are presented in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Evaluation criteria applied to the Key Performance Indicator (KPI) pool.

The process of applying the evaluation criteria to the KPI pool resulted in each indicator receiving
a score from 0 (minimum score) to 10 (maximum score). As a second step, the indicators with the highest
score were selected. A cut-off rule of a minimum score of 7 points was set for all indicators in order to
be considered for selection. In case two indicators served the same purpose, the one with the highest
score was selected, whereas in case of equal scores, the indicator with the highest score in relevance
was selected. The following criteria were further taken into account while selecting indicators:
•

Completeness: The set of indicators should consider all aspects of the implementation of smart
city projects. In that respect, indicators had to be selected to cover all defined dimensions as
described in Section 3.1.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

•

•

719

Non-redundancy: The set of indicators should not measure the same aspect of a subtheme. Extra
care was given as to not include indicators that assess the same parameter (double counting) even
if the score was higher in comparison with other indicators.
Independence: Small changes in the measurements of an indicator should not influence
preferences assigned to other indicators in the evaluation.

Resulting from this process, the number of indicators to be included in the final POCITYF KPI list
was reduced to 68 from the initial 258. During this step, the scope and the unit of measurement of
indicators were configured, if necessary, in order to improve the effectiveness of evaluation and comply
with the principles of sustainable development. In many cases, absolute units (e.g., kWh consumed)
had to be altered into relative ones (e.g., kWh consumed per m2) to better serve the aim of supporting
decision making and for comparison purposes. Finally, an iteration with various stakeholders (16 in
total, which refers to entities and not necessarily number of persons), including POCITYF technology
providers (13), city planners/authorities (2) and energy agencies (1), was necessary for the final KPI
list. Although the above-mentioned criteria are especially important for KPIs prioritization, it is also
of major significance that these KPIs reflect the opinion and needs of the POCITYF ecosystem and
especially city needs. To ensure this, outcomes from the above-described steps were shared and
iteratively discussed with city site managers and key technology providers of POCITYF for their
review. In this way, indicators that presented an interest for the cities were integrated or excluded by
the framework, leading to the finalized POCITYF’s KPI list. The finalized list includes a total of 63
indicators. Detailed results from this evaluation process and the final KPI list for the case of POCITYF
are presented in Section 4.1.
3.4. Clustering and Granularity Evaluation Levels
Once the final list of KPIs has been defined, the KPIs can be clustered according to their special
characteristics (type of indicator) and the scale of evaluation (spatial and temporal) they address. This
step, although it can be considered as optional, is important as it facilitates the monitoring procedure
and further increases the transparency of the assessment to be performed. Additionally, the detailed
analysis of KPIs clusters can lead to the identification of critical omissions at an early stage (e.g., KPIs
included in the list do not adequately cover the evaluation of different spatial scales).
3.4.1. Orientation—Type of KPIs
KPIs defined through the aforementioned process target both the technologies to be implemented
as well as the impact goals of each smart city project. KPIs focusing on the implementation of solutions
are essential towards proper monitoring and evaluation of each integrated technology’s effectiveness
and progress. Additionally, in the core of SCC projects’ vision and planned actions are their expected
impacts. Chosen KPIs are obliged to provide metrics on these impacts, which should assess the benefits
deriving from the solutions’ implementation. Thus, the selected KPIs can be categorized into two (2)
levels based on their orientation:
•

Output-oriented KPIs: These KPIs are simple concrete indicators for monitoring the progress and

•

effectiveness of implementation (e.g., number of smart meters, charging points, users of apps).
Impact (outcome) oriented KPIs: These indicators should assess the benefits of interventions as
well as the higher-level goals to which energy transition projects will contribute (e.g., savings in
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, improved air quality, increased replicability etc.). The KPIs
assessing the impact-oriented evaluation level are extremely important as they can be considered
as the end-result which positive energy transition development projects are pursuing through
their implementation activities.

Multiple output-oriented KPIs can monitor the contribution towards one impact target, to be
assessed by the impact-oriented KPI.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

720

3.4.2. From a Building to a City Level—Spatial Scale
The energy transition project undertaken by the city should aim to create positive-energy
mixed-used building blocks and districts while advancing on issues such as integrated planning,
social engagement, circular economy and green financing. The solutions developed need to be not
only replicated but also gradually scaled up to city level. Scalability is of utmost importance and
a key requirement for the wide-scale rollout of the innovative solutions. It refers to the possibility of
increasing the size of the project without compromising its efficiency and effectiveness. Cities that
can apply and scale-up smart solutions will become more attractive in terms of living conditions,
contributing to novel business models and eventually more local jobs creation towards sustainable
growth. In this light, the envisioned interventions must be assessed in different spatial granularity levels
in order to properly monitor their progress and performance and comply with the aforementioned
scalability requirement. Therefore, KPIs should include a spatial scaling component and they should
be selected, keeping always in mind the necessary expanding character of the smart solutions. In this
study, four (4) spatial levels of evaluation have been determined, based on SCIS and are suggested: a)
building level, b) building block (set of buildings level), c) district level and d) city level. The scaling to
a city level is a complicated procedure as many smart city solutions target building blocks and districts.
Nevertheless, a generalized evaluation on city level can be performed by focusing on the previous
granularity levels and projecting impact on a city level. For district and city levels of evaluation,
the respective boundaries and corresponding energy flows must be defined properly, including all
dimensional indicators. Aggregation and averaging methods can be used towards this evaluation.
3.4.3. From Present to Future—Temporal Scale
Smart energy efficiency solutions should aim to stand the test of time and provide ground for
replication activities in other cities. To make sure that the project delivers long-term impact to the cities,
projects should focus on citizen needs and embrace citizen-centric design. As most projects last for
a certain period of time (several years), the assessment of the innovative solutions’ performance and
main impact in the local societies cannot be exclusively determined during their duration. Each
city is a dynamic ecosystem with evolving needs and continuous development, and thus KPIs need
to take this time component into account when assessing the technologies implemented. From an
economic/business-related perspective, the performance of solutions in different timeframes is also
extremely important for lowering financial risks and promoting long-term investment. Moreover,
smart city projects should aim towards developing bold city visions covering urban planning, technical,
financial and social aspects. Towards this goal, indicators should provide the required temporal
perspective to help cities determine optimal solutions. Expected strategic impact should also be
structured in different temporal granularity levels. In this light, we define three (3) temporal frames:
•

In-project (short-term): In this temporal level, indicators should be evaluated during

•

the development project duration. This temporal level of evaluation provides important
information on the progress of a solution/service during the project and its performance relative
to the main objectives of the project. The energy transition of the LH cities during the project’s
lifetime can be easily assessed by evaluation in such short-term intervals.
End-of-project (mid-term): The assessment of technologies at the end of the project provides

•

information on the project’s overall performance and impact in the local societies. Aggregation
of the short-term level can be used to calculate the indicators by summation, averaging, etc.
whenever this is applicable.
Post-project (long-term): The post-project assessment falls outside of the projects’ duration.
Nevertheless, cities can continue monitoring the performance of solutions and their impact on
their bold city visions. The solutions to be implemented during a smart city project are not static,
and their interaction with other city solutions as well as performance in the long run should be

Smart Cities 2020, 3

721

evaluated in such a temporal scale to assess their long-standing success and provide feedback for
future projects.
4. Results
4.1. Evaluation Results—Final KPI List of POCITYF Project
The initial screening process of the 1928 indicators presented in Section 3.2 resulted in a pool
of 258 indicators which can potentially be adopted by smart city projects covering the dimensions
Energy, Environmental, Economic, ICT, Mobility, Social, Governance, and Propagation. A breakdown
of the percentage of indicators reflecting each dimension is presented in Figure 2. The Energy
dimension included the highest number of indicators (46), followed by the Economic (40), Mobility
(38), Governance (36), Environmental (29), ICT (27), Social (26) and Propagation (16). The Energy
dimension has central importance as technology is the motor towards achieving the ambitious goals of
smart cities and energy transition is at the core of EU strategy for climate change mitigation. Then,
technology-driven economic development can be supported by the Smart City paradigm if seen
as the top of a hierarchy that includes versatile benefits, such as cost savings, security, livability,
convenience, satisfaction and citizen involvement, all of which can be associated with economic
prosperity [45], the reason why many indicators are scored as important in this dimension. Mobility
also has a central role as it has always been important for moving people and goods. Especially
nowadays, traffic and communication are of increased importance for facilitating the optimization of
existing systems, as well as for finding alternative means of transport [46]. Finally, the smart cities’
potential to meet climate and sustainability goals make Governance the necessary catalyzer for realizing
smart city projects and the Environmental dimension as the next two most important ones, followed
by ICT as the backbone for collecting and delivering information at different end users [47]; the Social
dimension, which reflects how individual behaviors can assist in embracing the concept of smart city;
and Propagation, seen as the catalyst for successful exploitation and roll-out of smart city solutions.
The 258 indicators were then evaluated by means of the five assessment criteria reflected in
the CIVITAS framework (Figure 1) in conjunction with the criteria of completeness, non-redundancy
and independence, aiming to reach a final KPI shortlist of the most proper and tailored KPIs (included
in the pool) for monitoring smart and sustainable cities towards energy transition. As stated before,
the process followed, was to assess and score each KPI using a 3-point scale from 0 to 2, where 0
represented no satisfaction and 2 represented full satisfaction per criterion. The evaluation process of
the KPIs in the pool against the criteria Relevance, Availability, Measurability, Reliability, Familiarity
showed that the Energy and the ICT dimensions scored high in the Relevance criterion (1.8-1.9) as both
have an increased role in the realization of smart city projects and they can both demonstrate a clear
change mainly in the outputs and the optimization of the energy systems. In terms of the Availability
criterion, the dimensions that scored high were Governance (1.5), Mobility (1.39), and Economic
(1.38) as the data for calculating indicators in these three dimensions were considered relatively
easily obtainable. The dimension of Mobility (1.87), Energy (1.65) and Environmental (1.72) scored
high in terms of the criterion Measurability as all of them can be measured quantitively. In terms
of the criterion Reliability, the Mobility dimension scored the highest (1.63), whereas in terms of
the Familiarity criterion, the highest scores were observed in the dimension of Propagation (1.56).
The lowest score (0.92) was related to the Social dimension against the criterion of Reliability, and this
is explained by the fact that most KPIs in the Social dimension are measured with a Likert scale, which
may reduce reliability in the measurements. Finally, ICT has scored low (1.04) on familiarity since
the integration and cross-functional operation of the systems can raise the difficulty in aggregating
the measurements. The results are illustrated in Figure 3.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

722

Figure 2. Percentage of indicators (%) included in the eight dimensions of the proposed pool.

Figure 3. Scores of KPIs included in the pool against evaluation criteria.

After the above thorough analysis and evaluation through the assessment criteria as well as
taking into account more horizontal reasons like the existence of an indicator in the SCIS platform,
as previously mentioned, a representative number of the most appropriate indicators related with
smart city projects towards energy transition and PEDs was decided to be included in POCITYF’s KPI
Repository. Typically, KPIs that have a total score of 7 out of 10, satisfying also common city needs and
targeted objectives and impacts, have been selected. Figure 4 depicts a detailed breakdown of the KPIs.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

723

Figure 4. Number of selected indicators (%) included in the 8 dimensions of the finalized KPI list.

Table 5 illustrates the final set of KPIs adopted. The list contains 63 indicators categorized
per dimension (E: Energy, EN: Environmental, EC: Economic, ICT: ICT, M: Mobility, S: Social, G:
Governance, P: Propagation) providing also relevant information for each KPI about the various
sources pertaining to monitoring and evaluation frameworks for smart cities in which the indicator
was identified, as well as a short KPI description. It should be noted that for the analysis carried
out, some KPIs were modified accordingly to express in a more meaningful way and for an exact
purpose the project-specific needs. For instance, some KPIs with similar measuring or monitoring
targets were grouped together and merged into one indicator, resulting in amending also the KPI name,
whereas others were customized in the KPI formula or in the measurement unit, in order to be able to
reflect most accurately the expected metrics, impacts and outcomes. In addition, a number of KPIs can
be quantified capitalizing on a KPI formula, whereas other specific KPIs are based on a qualitative
measuring and assessment process.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

724

Table 5. Final KPI list of POCITYF project.
KPI Name

KPI Unit

KPI Sources

KPI Description

Energy
This indicator assesses the energy efficiency of a system for each sector
of buildings, transport, industry, public services (e.g., lighting), ICT, etc.,
also broken down into energy sources (electricity, heating, natural gas,
etc.) The energy demand and consumption correspond to the energy
entering the system in order to keep operation parameters (e.g., comfort
levels).

E.1 Energy Demand and
Consumption

kWh/(m2 ·month
kWh/(m2 ·year)
kWh/year

SCIS [17];
REPLICATE [20]; MATCHUP [21];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14];
Hara at al. (2016) [34]; Lombardi et al. (2012)
[35]; ETSI [40]; U4SSC [37]

E.2 Degree of energetic
self-supply by RES

%

SCIS [17]; Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]; Li et
al. (2017) [33]; Lombardi et al. (2012) [35];
mySMARTLIFE [23]; U4SSC [37]; SDG [36]

The degree of energetic self-supply by RES is defined as the ratio of
locally produced energy from RES and the energy consumption over
a period of time (e.g., month, year).

E.3 Self-Sufficiency Ratio

%

Luthander et al. (2015) [48]

The degree to which the on-site generation is sufficient to fill the final
energy needs of the building/system.

E.4 Energy Savings

kWh/ (m2 ·year);
MWh/(year);
%

SCIS [17]; mySMARTLIFE [23]; ITU-T [37];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]; Li et al. (2017)
[33]

This KPI determines the reduction of energy consumption to reach
the same services (e.g., comfort levels) after the interventions.

E.5 Reduced energy curtailment
of RES and DER

%

SCIS [17]; Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14];
+CityxChange [27]

The indicator assesses the reduction of energy curtailment due to
technical and operational problems such as over-voltage, over-frequency,
local congestion, etc.

E.6 kWp photovoltaic installed
per 100 inhabitants

kWp/100
inhabitants

Dall’O et al. (2017) [32]

Installed capacity of photovoltaic interpolated to 100 inhabitants.

E.7 Smart Storage Capacity

%; MWh

Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]; +CityxChange
[27]

The KPI includes all the energy storage technologies integrated in
the city smart grid containing electricity, heating and mobility, presenting
the impact of the project on the use of smart energy storage systems.

E.8 Heat Recovery Ratio

%

GrowSmarter [26]

The KPI refers to the percentage ratio of the total thermal energy output
of the system (MWh) to the thermal energy recovered through a waste
heat recovery technology (MWh).

E.9 Integrated Building
Management Systems (BMS)

%; [number]

U4SSC / ITU-T [37]

Percentage of buildings using integrated ICT systems to automate
building management and create flexible, effective, comfortable and
secure environment.

E.10 Percentage of buildings in
the city with smart energy
meters

%

ISO/FDIS 37122: 2019 [38]

Percentage of buildings using smart energy meters to record and display
the consumption of energy in real time, thus providing energy providers
data to better plan and conserve energy.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

725

Table 5. Cont.
KPI Name

KPI Unit

KPI Sources

KPI Description

E.11 Specific Yield

W/kWp; W/m2

SmartEnCity [22]

Metered output energy of a supply system related to the size (capacity)
of the system.

E.12 Storage Energy Losses

%

Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]; Li et al. (2017)
[33]

This KPI illustrates the energy losses because of battery storage,
including the added voltage transformations.

E.13 Thermal Load Reduction

W

Li et al. (2017) [33]

Reduction of heating/cooling load caused by envelope insulation in
specific thermal zone.

E.14 Peak Load reduction

%

Li et al. (2017) [33]

The indicator compares the peak demand before the aggregator
implementation (baseline) with the peak demand after; per final
consumer, per feeder, per network.

E.15 Street lighting
management

%

ISO/FDIS 37122: 2019 [38]

Percentage of street lighting managed by a light performance
management system.

Environmental
EN.1 Greenhouse Gas
Emissions

/(m2 *year);

SCIS [17]; Lombardi et al. (2012) [35]; Hara et
kgCO2eq
kgCO2eq /(kWh*year); al. (2016) [34]; MATCHUP [21]; U4SSC [37];
ETSI [40]; +CityxChange [27]
%

The KPI calculates the amount of emissions for six major GHGs: carbon
dioxide (CO2 ), methane (CH4 ), nitrous oxide (N2 O), hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6 ).

EN.2 Carbon Dioxide Emission
Reduction

tons/year;
tons/capita/year; %

SCIS [17]; CITYkeys [11]; Angelakoglou et al.
(2019) [14]; Li et al. (2017) [33]; Tan et al. (2017)
[30]; Dall’O et al.(2017) [32]; IRIS [19];
SmartEnCity [22]; REPLICATE [20];
+CityxChange [27]

EN.3 Air Quality Index

Index (no unit) of
PM10 , PM2.5, NOX,
SO2 Ozone &
Benzene.

CITYkeys [11]; MATCHUP [21]; U4SSC [37];
ETSI [40]

The indicator provides a relative measure of the annual average air
quality in relation to the European limit values (annual air quality
standards and objectives from EU directives).

EN.4 Primary Energy Demand
and Consumption

kWh/(m2 *month;
kWh/(m2 *year)

SCIS [17]; MATCHUP [21]; mySMARTLIFE
[23]

The indicator of the primary energy demand/consumption of every
metered system encompasses all the naturally available energy that is
consumed in the supply chain of the used energy carriers.

EN.5 Climate Resilience
Strategy

Likert Scale (1-7)

CITYkeys [11]; ETSI [40]

This indicator assesses to what extent the city has a resilience strategy
and action plan to adapt/respond to climate change, by providing
a qualitative measure.

CO2 emissions can be considered a useful indicator to assess
the contribution of urban development on climate change. The main
sources are processes related to energy generation and transport.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

726

Table 5. Cont.
KPI Name

KPI Unit

KPI Sources

KPI Description

EN.6 Noise Pollution

%

CITYkeys [11]; Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14];
Akande et al. (2019) [29]; IRIS [19];
REPLICATE [20]; MATCHUP [21]; ISO 37120:
2018 [39]; U4SSC [37]; ETSI [40];

This KPI refers to the measurement of noise in level of decibels (dB)
before and after the activities of the project.

EN.7 Municipal Solid Waste

tons/capita/month
tons/capita/year

CITYkeys [11]; Tan et al. (2017) [30]; Dall’O et
al. (2017) [32]; Hara et al. (2016) [34];
REPLICATE [20]; ISO 37120: 2018 [39]; ETSI
[40]

This indicator provides a measure of how much waste a city is
producing and the level of service a city is providing for its collection.

%

CITYkeys [11]; Tan et al. (2017) [30]; Dall’O et
al. (2017) [32]; Lombardi et al. (2012) [35];
REPLICATE [20]; ISO 37120: 2018 [39]; ETSI
[40]; U4SSC [37]

This KPI estimates the percentage of city’s solid waste that is recycled,
calculated as the total amount of the city’s solid waste that is recycled in
tons divided by the total amount of solid waste produced.

EN.8 Recycling Rate of Solid
Waste

Economic
€/m2 , € (total)

SCIS [17];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]; +CityxChange
[27]

The KPI is defined as the number of cumulated payments relevant to
the energy aspects of the systems (e.g., highly efficient envelope in
a building), including also business-as-usual case investments.

€/year

SCIS [17];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]

The total annual costs are defined as the sum of capital-related annual
costs (e.g., interests and repairs caused by the investment),
requirement-related costs (e.g., power costs), operation-related costs
(e.g., costs of using the installation) and other costs (e.g., insurance).

EC.3 Payback Period

Years

SCIS [17]; CITYkeys [11];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]; +CityxChange
[27]

The payback period is the time it takes to cover investment costs. It can
be calculated from the number of years elapsed between the initial
investment and the time at which cumulative savings offset
the investment.

EC.4 Return on Investment
(ROI)

%

SCIS [17]; Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14];
+CityxChange [27]

The return on investment (ROI) is defined as the ratio between the total
incomes/net profit and the total investment of the project/product, etc.

EC.5 Average Electricity Price
for Companies and Consumers

€/kWh

TRIANGULUM [25]

The indicator represents the average minimum cost at which electricity
must be sold so as to balance the costs with profits.

EC.6 Percentage of the Total
Distributed Energy Resources
Capacity Traded

%

+CityxChange [27]

This KPI measures the amount of Distributed Energy Resources (DERs)
capacity traded as a percentage of the total DERs capacity available.

EC.1 Total Investments

EC.2 Total Annual Costs

Smart Cities 2020, 3

727

Table 5. Cont.
KPI Name

KPI Unit

KPI Sources

KPI Description

EC.7 Local Job Creation

# of jobs

CITYkeys [11]; MATCHUP [21];
+CityxChange [27]; mySMARTLIFE [23];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14];

This indicator assesses the creation of direct jobs from
the implementation and operation of smart city project solutions.

EC.8 Energy Poverty

%

CITYkeys [11]; REPLICATE [20]; ETSI [40];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]

The KPI evaluates the extent to which households are at risk of poverty
or deprivation by calculating the change in percentage points of (gross)
household income spent on energy bills.

EC.9 Carbon Dioxide Reduction
Cost Efficiency

€/(ton CO2
saved/year)

CITYkeys [11];
mySMARTLIFE [23]
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14];

The specific KPI estimates the costs in euros per ton of CO2 saved per
year. This KPI can be estimated capitalizing on information already
available in other KPIs (carbon dioxide emission reduction and total
annual costs).

EC.10 New Business Creation

#/100.000
population; %

CITYkeys [11]; ETSI [40]

The indicator assesses the number of new businesses created (including
start-ups) as one point of overall business climate in a jurisdiction and
entrepreneurship.

EC.11 Expenditures by
the municipality for a transition
towards a smart city

€/capita; €; %

CITYkeys [11];
REPLICATE [20]; MATCHUP [21];
ETSI [40]; ITU-T [37]

Smart city expenditures include process-relevant expenditures and
findings. Estimates should also include the percentage of municipal
budget allocated to the ICT facilities.

ICT

%; W/€

SCIS [17];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]

The indicator determines the increased system flexibility for the energy
utilities as an effective way to exploit all resources to respond to a set of
diversions (e.g., demand changes in a specific time interval) and
maintain the power balance in terms of load or cost.

ICT.2 Increased hosting
capacity for RES, electric
vehicles and other new loads

%

SCIS [17];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]

The indicator determines the improvement of hosting capacity with
regards to additional loads and installations in the network when R&I
solutions are applied and also compared to the baseline scenario.

ICT.3 Improved Data Privacy

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

CITYkeys [11];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14];
ETSI [40]; ITU-T [37]

This indicator refers to the level of improvement of data privacy and
safety, analyzing the extent to which data collected by the project are
protected, for instance, by following regulations on data protection and
implementing proper procedures to protect personal or private data.

ICT.4 Quality of Open Data

%

Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]

Percentage of data that use DCAT standards.

ICT.1 Increased System
Flexibility for Energy Players

Smart Cities 2020, 3

728

Table 5. Cont.
KPI Name

KPI Unit

KPI Sources

KPI Description

ICT.5 ICT Response Time

ms/byte; sec/byte;
min/byte Depends on
the system

SmartEnCity [22]; mySMARTLIFE [23]

The response time of ICT infrastructure is related to the services
developed and the payload (information exchanged) between them,
applicable to the various ICT actions and services in the project.

ICT.6 Improved Cybersecurity

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

CITYkeys [11]; MATCHUP [21];
ETSI [40]

The indicator refers to the extent to which the project ensures
cybersecurity of its systems.

ICT.7 Platform Downtime

Minutes / (h, d, w,
m)

Angelakoglou et al. (2019)

The indicator quantifies the platform downtime per selected timeframe.

Mobility

[number]; %

SCIS [17]; U4SSC [37];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14];
ISO/FDIS 37122: 2019 [38];
MATCHUP [21]; REPLICATE [20]

Number of electric vehicles (EV) and low-carbon vehicles (PHEV and
hydrogen) registered in the area in relation to the total number of
motorized vehicles (four and two wheels).

M.2 Number of EV charging
stations and solar powered V2G
charging stations deployed in
the area

[number]; %

Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14];
SCIS [17];
Dall’O et al. (2017) [32];
REPLICATE [20]

Number of e-charging and V2G stations, public and private and fast
chargers. The indicator refers to the following measurements: number of
total stations deployed, along with their locations; e-charging stations
deployed and V2G stations deployed. They could also be expressed as
a percentage compared to total number of stations.

M.3 Annual Energy delivered
by charging points

KWh/year

MATCHUP [21]; SmartEnCity [22];
mySMARTLIFE [23]

The KPI refers to the level of use of the EV charging infrastructure
implemented in the city, calculating the total kWh recharged by all types
of EVs during a year in the public charging stations.

M.4 Annual number of
passengers using the new
vehicles and/or infrastructure

#of
passengers/year

mySMARTLIFE [23]

The level of utilization of the new vehicles or infrastructure should be
expressed by the number of passengers or users traveling during a year
with the new vehicles (e.g., EVs and e-buses) or on the new
infrastructure deployed.

M.5 Shared Electric Vehicles
Penetration Rate

[number]; %

mySMARTLIFE [23]

Number of e-vehicles that operate in the platform and in the community
car-sharing concept.

M.6 Clean mobility utilization

Km; # of trips

SCIS [17]; +CityxChange [27]

The indicator assesses the number of km in clean vehicles and number of
trips in clean vehicles as a means of sustainable mobility.

M.7 Modal Split
(Passengers/Vehicles/Trips)

% of vkm; % of
passenger.km; % of
trips

SCIS [17]

The indicator determines the distribution of transport over
the modalities of public and collective transport, private vehicles, biking
and walking.

M.8 Yearly km of Shared
Vehicles

Km/year

U4SSC [37];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]

The indicator assesses the yearly km made through the e-car sharing
system instead of private conventional cars.

M.1 Electric Vehicles &
Low-Carbon Emission Vehicles
deployed in the area

Smart Cities 2020, 3

729

Table 5. Cont.
KPI Name

KPI Unit

KPI Sources

KPI Description

S.1 People Reached

%

CITYkeys [11]; Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14];
mySMARTLIFE [23]

Percentage of people in the target group that have been reached and/or
are activated by the project.

S.2 Connection to the existing
cultural heritage

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

CITYkeys [11]; mySMARTLIFE [23]

The extent to which making a connection to the existing cultural heritage
was considered in the design of the project.

S.3 Local community
involvement in
the implementation and
planning phase

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]

The extent to which residents/users have been involved in
the implementation process.

S.4 Degree of satisfaction

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

mySMARTLIFE [23];
Hara et al. (2016) [34]

The level of satisfaction and acceptance of people affected by the actions
in the project, from a technical point of view; perceived adequateness,
benefit (e.g., comfort), usefulness, ease of use and aesthetics; economic
point of view; and cost, risk and benefit.

S.5 Percentage of citizens’
participation in online
decision-making

%

MATCHUP [21];

The indicator assesses the percentage of citizens that take part in online
decision-making.

Social

Governance
G.1 Online visits to
the municipal open data portal

#/100 000

ISO/FDIS 37122: 2019 [38]

Number of visits to the municipal open data portal in a year per 100,000
population.

G.2 Percentage of city services
accessible and that can be
requested online
(e-Governance)

%

ISO/FDIS 37122: 2019 [38]; U4SSC [37];
Lombardi et al. (2012) [35];
Dall’O et al. (2017) [32]

The total number of city services offered to people and businesses
through a centralized Internet interface compared to the total number of
city services offered by the city.

G.3 Monitoring and evaluation

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

CITYkeys [11]; ETSI [40]

The extent to which the progress towards a smart city and compliance
with requirements is being monitored and reported.

G.4
Legal Framework
Compatibility

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]

The level of suitability of the legal framework for the integration of a)
RES generation, b) symbiotic waste-heat, c) energy flexibility, d) private
and public EV penetration and e-mobility and e) CIPs for energy
management and citizen engagement; policies

G.5
Open government dataset

#/100,000

MATCHUP [21]; mySMARTLIFE [23];
U4SSC [37]; ETSI [40]

The indicator measures the number of open government datasets per
100,000 inhabitants, showing how involved the local government is in
building a smart city.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

730

Table 5. Cont.
KPI Name

KPI Unit

KPI Sources

KPI Description

Propagation
P.1 Social compatibility

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

CITYkeys [11];
Angelakoglou et al. (2019) [14]

The extent to which the project’s solution fits with people’s “frame of
mind” and does not negatively challenge people’s values or the ways
they are used to do things.

P.2 Technical compatibility

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

CITYkeys [11]

The extent to which the smart city solution fits with the current existing
technological standards/infrastructures.

P.3 Market demand

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

CITYkeys [11]

The extent to which there is a general market demand for the solution.
An important characteristic is if the innovation meets the needs of its
potential adopters.

P.4 Diffusion to other locations

5-point Likert scale
(No Unit)

CITYkeys [11]

The extent to which the project is copied in other cities and regions.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

731

4.2. Clustering and Granularity Analytics
The POCITYF KPI list includes indicators that pertain to various levels of granularity as well as
orientation as previously described in detail (Section 3.4). The clustering procedure has been performed
by the authors and selected POCITYF partners in order to aggregate KPIs into the different evaluation
levels necessary for a transparent, all-inclusive and properly defined monitoring and evaluation
process. Each KPI has been assessed individually in order to specify the following:
1.
2.

3.

Is it oriented towards the positive energy transformation project impact or is it focused on
the output (progress and performance) of a specific action? A binary choice has been made.
Should it be evaluated multiple times during the project lifetime, only once at the end of the project
or should evaluation be performed in the years following the project end? Multiple (more than
one) choices for this temporal scale of evaluation were possible.
Does it apply on a building, block, district or city level? Multiple (more than one) choices for this
spatial scale of evaluation were possible.

Figure 5 shows the evaluation levels and clusters along with the number of KPIs belonging to
each dimension. From the total of 63 KPIs, 32 are impact-oriented while 31 are output-oriented. We
note thus a great balance between KPIs that showcase POCITYF’s global impact and KPIs that assess
progress and performance. This balance is greatly pronounced in the Technical (seven impact-oriented
vs. eight output-oriented), Environmental (five vs. three), Social (two vs. three) and Governance (three
vs. two) dimensions. KPIs dealing with Propagation are all impact-oriented (four vs. zero) as they
assess compatibility, scalability and diffusion potential of solutions. These KPIs are balanced by ICT
ones which are purely output-oriented (zero vs. seven) as they focus on ICT progress and performance
while the impact of ICT is mainly assessed indirectly under other dimensions (e.g., resulting energy
savings).

Figure 5. KPI evaluation levels and clusters.

In the temporal scale of evaluation, 53 KPIs are to be evaluated during the project, 56 at the end
of the project and 32 after the end of the project. The post-project evaluation level contains the least
number of KPIs but all KPIs under the Governance (100%) and Propagation (100%) dimensions

Smart Cities 2020, 3

732

as these dimensions deal with important indicators that should be projected in time. Twenty-six
(41%) KPIs are to be evaluated on all three temporal levels, 26 (41%) on two out of three while 11
(17%) KPIs on only one temporal level. For example, KPI—E.1 Energy Demand and Consumption is to
be continuously evaluated during the positive energy transformation project, at the end of the project
to reflect its success and post-project in order to adjust and evaluate the performance of interventions
as demand might change. On the other hand, KPI—E.15 Percentage of street lighting managed by
a light performance management system should be evaluated only once at the end of the project as it
reflects the successful installations due to the project.
In the spatial scale of evaluation, 36 (57%) KPIs are to be evaluated on a building level, 38 (60%)
on a PEB level, 52 (82%) on a PED level and 55 (87%) on a city level. We note that KPIs dealing with
Mobility are to be evaluated only on a Positive Energy District and city level, owing to their broader
granularity of application. Twenty-nine (46%) KPIs are to be evaluated on all four spatial levels, 7
(11%) on three out of four, 17 (27%) on two out of four and 10 (16%) KPIs on only one spatial level.
For example, KPI—E.4 Energy Savings applies to all spatial granules as energy related interventions
might be applicable to a building (e.g., BMS), PEB (e.g., PV systems), PED (e.g., DHC) or city (e.g.,
V2G). Contrarily, KPI—EN.5 Climate Resilience Strategy can and should be evaluated only on a city
level as it assesses to what extent the city has a resilience strategy and action plan.
5. Conclusions
Smart City projects incorporate a multitude of solutions that will accelerate the energy transition of
cities. This variety of solutions circulates around the citizens’ needs, which causally relate to city needs.
Positive energy buildings and districts, grid flexibility, circular economy, e-mobility and citizen-driven
innovation are all an integral part of smart city projects. Therefore, the projects’ success can only be
evaluated through specific, tailored KPIs which need to be defined according to the scope of the specific
city interventions and the stakeholders’ needs but also provide comparability through established
evaluation frameworks and monitoring databases.
The core objective of this paper was thence to provide a complete list of KPIs using scientifically
proven methods and procedures that takes into account the needs of the cities, the technologies to
be implemented and the existing literature on KPI frameworks in order to promote comparability.
These KPIs need to be inclusive, specific, transparent to misinterpretations and assess all levels of
impact that a positive energy transformation project can bring forward.
The approach followed in this study differentiates from other similar frameworks in the KPI
selection process for smart city projects having as a core focus the energy transition, providing (a)
an extensive pool of KPIs developed after a deep review of relevant KPI frameworks (through this
study, the reader can have a wide overview of the relevant literature to build upon); (b) a final set
of KPIs that have been selected based on a solid evaluation procedure for increasing replicability
and adaptability of results; (c) various levels of granularity and KPIs grouping which have been
defined and analyzed aiming to facilitate the evaluation and monitoring procedure of SCC projects
and (d) a holistic approach that can also be insightful to help the readers and stakeholders understand
unfamiliar or difficult concepts related to smart city performance. Compared to the KPI reference
databases studied in this work, the final list of 63 indicators lies very close to the average number
(approx. 77 KPIs—see Table 3) used in the literature. This number provides an excellent balance
between monitoring feasibility/facilitation and inclusion of the most important and relevant indicators.
Therefore, the proposed approach can result in a comprehensive yet concise list of KPIs.
Despite our efforts to increase objectivity of the KPI selection as much as possible, there is still
a level of subjectivity involved, since the scoring was performed by a panel of experts reflecting mostly
the POCITYF needs. However, since most of the smart city projects that focus on the energy transition
share common targets, we expect that most of the proposed KPIs are highly relevant to all these projects.
The KPI list can serve as a backbone for the monitoring and evaluation activities in smart city projects,

Smart Cities 2020, 3

733

not only in terms of technological performance but also at the level of social engagement, acceptance
of positive energy transformation and diffusion towards scalable and replicable innovations.
Supplementary Materials: The following is available online at http://www.mdpi.com/2624-6511/3/3/36/s1, Table
S1: Indicator pool and evaluation according to pre-defined criteria.
Author Contributions: The present article is addressed by the six authors mentioned, each of whom was
responsible for various aspects of the work. Specifically, conceptualization, K.A., K.K., P.G. and J.K.; methodology,
K.A., K.K. and P.G.; validation, K.A., K.K. and J.K.; formal analysis, K.A., K.K, P.G. and V.A.; investigation, K.A.,
K.K., P.G. and V.A.; resources N.N.; data curation, K.A., K.K., P.G. and V.A.; writing—original draft preparation,
K.A., K.K., P.G. and V.A.; writing—review and editing K.A., K.K., P.G., N.N. and J.K.; supervision, N.N. and J.K.;
funding acquisition, N.N, K.A. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the POCITYF project (A positive energy city transformation framework),
Grant agreement number 864400, which received funding from the European Union’s framework program
Horizon 2020 for research and innovation. This APC is free of charge after the cordial invitation of Traey Wu to
Komninos Angelakoglou.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the following partners from the POCITYF project for their
contribution towards the final KPI list included in this work: Panagiotis Tsarchopoulos (CERTH), Aapo Huovila
(VTT), José Miguel Costa (EDP), Rui Lopes (UNINOVA), Joao Formiga (EDP), Hainoun Ali (AIT), Luis Miranda
(INESCTEC), João Peixoto (UW), Joep Sanderink (NEC), Martijn de Vries (NEC), Mente Konsman (TNO) and
Vasiliki Georgiadou (TNO).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

REN21. Renewables in Cities Global Status Report; Paris: REN21 Secretariat; REN21: Paris, France, 2020;
ISBN 978-3-948393-00-7.
AirVisual. World’s Most Polluted Cities in 2019—PM2.5 Ranking. Available online: https://www.iqair.com/
world-most-polluted-cities (accessed on 3 June 2020).
TomTom. Traffic Index 2019—Live Congestion Statistics and Historical Data. Available online: https:
//www.tomtom.com/en_gb/traffic-index/ (accessed on 3 June 2020).
UNFCCC. The Paris Agreement. 2015. Available online: https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-parisagreement/the-paris-agreement (accessed on 3 June 2020).
European Commission. The European Green Deal. COM (2019) 640 Final; EC: Brussels, Belgium, 11 December
2019.
Bifulco, F.; Tregua, M.; Amitrano, C.C.; D’Auria, A. ICT and sustainability in smart cities management. Int. J.
Public Sect. Manag. 2016. [CrossRef]
Di Silvestre, M.L.; Favuzza, S.; Sanseverino, E.R.; Zizzo, G. How Decarbonization, Digitalization and
Decentralization are changing key power infrastructures. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018, 93, 483–498.
[CrossRef]
Hemment, D.; Woods, M.; Appadoo, V.; Bui, L. Community Key Performance Indicators (Community KPIs) for
the IoT and Smart Cities; FutureEverything: Manchester, UK, 2016.
Kitchin, R.; Lauriault, T.P.; McArdle, G. Knowing and governing cities through urban indicators, city
benchmarking and real-time dashboards. Reg. Stud. Reg. Sci. 2015, 2, 6–28. [CrossRef]
Dameri, R.P. Smart city definition, goals and performance. In Smart City Implementation; Springer:
Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2017; pp. 1–22.
Bosch, P.; Jongeneel, S.; Rovers, V.; Neumann, H.-M.; Airaksinen, M.; Huovila, A. CITYkeys indicators for
smart city projects and smart cities. CITYkeys Rep. 2017. [CrossRef]
Sharifi, A. A typology of smart city assessment tools and indicator sets. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2020, 53, 101936.
[CrossRef]
Huovila, A.; Bosch, P.; Airaksinen, M. Comparative analysis of standardized indicators for Smart sustainable
cities: What indicators and standards to use and when? Cities 2019, 89, 141–153. [CrossRef]
Angelakoglou, K.; Nikolopoulos, N.; Giourka, P.; Svensson, I.-L.; Tsarchopoulos, P.; Tryferidis, A.; Tzovaras, D.
A Methodological Framework for the Selection of Key Performance Indicators to Assess Smart City Solutions.
Smart Cities 2019, 2, 269–306. [CrossRef]

Smart Cities 2020, 3

15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

734

A Positive Energy CITY Transformation Framework | POCITYF Project | H2020 | CORDIS | European
Commission. Available online: https://pocityf.eu/ (accessed on 10 July 2020).
European Commission. SET-Plan Action 3.2, Implementation Plan, Europe to Become A Global Role Model in
Integrated, Innovative Solutions for the Planning, Deployment, and Replication of Positive Energy Districts; European
Commission: Brussels, Belgium, June 2018.
SCIS Essential Monitoring Guides. Smartcities Information System. Available online: https://smartcitiesinfosystem.eu/library/resources/scis-essential-monitoring-guides (accessed on 3 June 2020).
Smart Cities and Community Lighthouse Projects. Smartcities Information System. Available online:
https://smartcities-infosystem.eu/scc-lighthouse-projects (accessed on 3 June 2020).
Tsarchopoulos, P. IRIS D1.1: Report on the List of Selected KPIs for Each Transition Track. Available online:
https://irissmartcities.eu/public-deliverables (accessed on 9 June 2020).
REPLICATE-D10.2: Report on Indicators for Monitoring at City Level. Available online: https://replicateproject.eu/newsroom/downloads/ (accessed on 9 June 2020).
MatchUp-D1.1: Indicators Tools and Methods for Advanced City Modelling and Diagnosis. Available online:
https://www.matchup-project.eu/technical-insights/ (accessed on 9 June 2020).
SmartEnCity-D7.2: Monitoring and Evaluation: KPIs Definition. Available online: https://www.smartencity.
eu/ttps://smartencity.eu/news/detail/?rx_call=114 (accessed on 9 June 2020).
MySMARTLife: D5.1-Integrated Evaluation Procedure. Available online: https://www.mysmartlife.eu/
publications-media/public-deliverables/ (accessed on 9 June 2020).
SHARING CITIES-D8.1: Common Monitoring and Evaluation Framework. Available online: http://www.
sharingcities.eu/sharingcities/deliverables (accessed on 9 June 2020).
TRIANGULUM-D2.1: Common Monitoring and Impact Assessment Framework. Available online: https:
//www.triangulum-project.eu/?page_id=119 (accessed on 9 June 2020).
GrowSmarter: Publications-D5.1: Evaluation Plan. Available online: https://grow-smarter.eu/inform/
publications/ (accessed on 9 June 2020).
+CityxChange, D7.1-Approach and Methodology for Monitoring and Evaluation. Available online: https:
//cityxchange.eu/article-categories/deliverables/ (accessed on 9 June 2020).
STARDUST-D7.3: Business Models and KPIs Analysis and Validation for Lighthouse Cities Interventions.
Available online: https://stardustproject.eu/resources/ (accessed on 9 June 2020).
Akande, A.; Cabral, P.; Gomes, P.; Casteleyn, S. The Lisbon ranking for smart sustainable cities in Europe.
Sustain. Cities Soc. 2019, 44, 475–487. [CrossRef]
Tan, S.; Yang, J.; Yan, J.; Lee, C.; Hashim, H.; Chen, B. A holistic low carbon city indicator framework for
sustainable development. Appl. Energy 2017, 185, 1919–1930. [CrossRef]
Girardi, P.; Temporelli, A. Smartainability: A methodology for assessing the sustainability of the smart city.
Energy Procedia 2017, 111, 810–816. [CrossRef]
Dall’O, G.; Bruni, E.; Panza, A.; Sarto, L.; Khayatian, F. Evaluation of cities’ smartness by means of indicators
for small and medium cities and communities: A methodology for Northern Italy. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2017,
34, 193–202. [CrossRef]
Li, Y.; O’Donnell, J.; García-Castro, R.; Vega-Sánchez, S. Identifying stakeholders and key performance
indicators for district and building energy performance analysis. Energy Build. 2017, 155, 1–15. [CrossRef]
Hara, M.; Nagao, T.; Hannoe, S.; Nakamura, J. New key performance indicators for a smart sustainable city.
Sustainability 2016, 8, 206. [CrossRef]
Lombardi, P.; Giordano, S.; Farouh, H.; Yousef, W. Modelling the smart city performance. Innov. Eur. J. Soc.
Sci. Res. 2012, 25, 137–149. [CrossRef]
United Nations. Global SDG Indicators Database. Available online: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/indicators/
database/ (accessed on 4 June 2020).
ITU. Collection Methodology for Key Performance Indicators for Smart Sustainable Cities; UNECE: Geneva,
Switzerland, 2017.
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 37122: Sustainable Development in Communities-Indicators
for Smart Cities; International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2017.
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 37120: Sustainable Cities and Communities-Indicators for
City Services and Quality of Life; International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2018.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

46.
47.

48.

735

CEN, C. SSCC-CG final report. Smart and Sustainable Cities and Communities Coordination Group; ETSI: Sophia
Antipolis, France, 2015.
CEN-CENELEC. Making Standards for Europe-Smart Cities. Available online: https://www.cencenelec.eu/
standards/Sectorsold/SmartLiving/smartcities/Pages/default.aspx (accessed on 4 June 2020).
ETSI. TS 103 463 V1.1.1 Access, Terminals, Transmission and Multiplexing (ATTM); Key Performance Indicators
for Sustainable Digital Multiservice Cities; ETSI: Sophia Antipolis, France, 2017.
ETSI. GS OEU 019 V1.1.1 Operational Energy Efficiency for Users (OEU); KPIs for Smart Cities; ETSI: Sophia
Antipolis, France, 2017.
Rooijen, T.; Nesterova, N. Deliverable 4.10: Applied framework for evaluation in CIVITAS PLUS II, WP4, May 31
2013; CivitasWiki Project; Grant Agreement No.: 296081; CIVITAS Secretariat, EC: Brussels, Belgium, 2013.
Chordant-ABI Research. Role of Smart Cities for Economic Development. White Paper. 2018. Available
online: https://www.chordant.io/white_papers/abi-research-role-of-smart-cities-for-economic-development
(accessed on 9 June 2020).
Mobility. Center for Smart Cities. Available online: https://www.ict-smart-cities-center.com/en/smart-cities/
mobilitaet/ (accessed on 9 June 2020).
Dameri, R.P. Using ICT in Smart City. In Smart City Implementation: Creating Economic and Public Value
in Innovative Urban Systems; Dameri, R.P., Ed.; Progress in IS.; Springer International Publishing: Cham,
Switzerland, 2017; pp. 45–65. ISBN 978-3-319-45766-6.
Luthander, R.; Widén, J.; Nilsson, D.; Palm, J. Photovoltaic self-consumption in buildings: A review. Appl.
Energy 2015, 142, 80–94. [CrossRef]
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

