sustainability
Article

Getting Started with Positive Energy Districts: Experience until
Now from Maia, Reykjavik, Kifissia, Kladno and Lviv
Zarrin Fatima 1, * , Tomas Vacha 2 , Kavyashree Swamygowda 3 and Reef Qubailat 3
1
2

3

*

Citation: Fatima, Z.; Vacha, T.;
Swamygowda, K.; Qubailat, R.
Getting Started with Positive Energy

Technical Research Centre of Finland, 02044 Espoo, Finland
University Centre for Energy Efficient Buildings, Czech Technical University in Prague,
273 43 Bustehrad, Czech Republic; tomas.vacha@cvut.cz
Fraunhofer IAO, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany; kavyashree.swamygowda@iao.fraunhofer.de (K.S.);
reef.qubailat@iao.fraunhofer.de (R.Q.)
Correspondence: zarrin.fatima@vtt.fi

Abstract: Cities are at the centre of the debate to mitigate climate change. A considerable number
of cities have already made commitments to sustainability transitions through the introduction and
integration of green strategies. Moreover, in the past few years, Europe has witnessed an increase in
the development of smart cities and advancement towards creating more sustainable cities. At the
moment, an innovative concept in smart city development involves Positive Energy Districts (PEDs)
that further encourage districts and cities to become carbon neutral. This paper looks at the five
cities of Maia, Reykjavik, Kifissia, Kladno and Lviv that are a part of an ongoing H2020 project. The
purpose of the paper was to understand the status quo of energy transition in these five cities as they
embarked on the PEDs journey and identify associated challenges and benefits that PEDs brought to
each city. The information was collected through a knowledge gap survey, City Vision 2050 workshop,
discussions during the City Forum and individual interviews with city representatives. Cities across
Europe and beyond may find themselves in a similar situation, and therefore, this paper also provides
brief set of checkpoints to prepare new cities for the PED journey, thus enabling them to transition
towards PEDs more efficiently.

Districts: Experience until Now from
Maia, Reykjavik, Kifissia, Kladno and

Keywords: replication; energy transition; cities; challenges; Positive Energy Districts

Lviv. Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su14105799
Academic Editors:
Federica Cucchiella, Marianna Rotilio
and Pierluigi De Berardinis
Received: 31 March 2022
Accepted: 7 May 2022
Published: 11 May 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction
In 2020, as economies struggled with the weight of COVID-19 lockdowns, renewable
sources of energy such as wind and solar photovoltaics (PV) continued to grow rapidly, and
electric vehicles set new sales records. The new economy has characteristics of being more
electrified, efficient, interconnected, and clean. Solar PV and wind are now the cheapest
available sources of new electricity generation. However, this positive situation is countered
by the sharp increase in prices in natural gas, coal, and electricity markets [1]. While there
have been significant advances in renewables during the pandemic, 2021 witnessed a large
rebound to coal and oil use. This led to the second largest annual increase in carbon emissions.
Therefore, the energy sector must be at the heart of the efforts to tackle climate change [1].
Cities are the focal points for de-carbonization strategies relating to energy, transport,
buildings, industry, and agriculture [2]. While cities occupy only 2% of the total land, they
account for 40% of the total energy consumption, contribute to 70% of the greenhouse
gas emissions and about two-thirds of global energy demand [3–5]. At the moment, 55%
of the world’s population live in urban areas, and this is expected to increase to 68% by
2050 [6,7]. Cities have access to large capital and abundant know; therefore, they have
the ability to create the economies of scale essential for the piloting and scaling up of new
ideas [2]. In the past, services and infrastructure development ‘reacted’ to expanding cities
instead of being ‘planned as a process’. This is a reason why utilities are not aligned with
infrastructure and why cities often do not have fully integrated water supplies or electricity

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14105799

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

2 of 20

networks. In addition, the success is also heavily dependent on proper identification of any
potential obstacles and rebound effects such as unintended indirect impacts [8].
Dealing with the climate emergency is not only the responsibility of cities but also
of citizens who are not only political actors in a governance structure, but also users,
producers, consumers, and owners. A combined effort from these actors may have a huge
impact on urban areas, associations, and homes, thus propelling the climate transition,
advancing the economy, and preserving the environment. As evidently said by the Mission
Board for Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities, citizens and civil society have to be given
more substantial roles, new platforms for action, and better resources [2,9].
The imperative role of cities in sustainability transitions is also emphasized in the
Sustainable Development Goal 11 that aims to “make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and
sustainable”. The United Nations has adopted the ‘New Urban Agenda’ [5] and the
European Union has implemented the 2016 Pact of Amsterdam [10] to address societal
challenges and include urban aspects in policies. Furthermore, the European Green Deal
makes explicit reference to cities to reach the European Union’s (EU) climate-neutral and
circular transition objectives [4].
Identifying the key trends in urbanization likely to unfold over the coming years is
crucial for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, including
efforts to establish a new framework for urban development [7]. A significant number of
cities has already made commitments to sustainability transitions: Copenhagen (Denmark)
is focusing on being the first carbon-neutral city by 2025; Adelaide (Australia) aims to have
zero net carbon emissions and 50% renewables by 2025; Amsterdam (The Netherlands)
aims to halve the use of new raw materials by 2020 and be fully circular by 2025; while
Oslo (Norway), Los Angeles (United States), Stockholm (Sweden), Beijing (China), London
(United Kingdom), and the San Francisco Bay Area (United States) have announced their
ambitions to become electric vehicle capitals or leaders [4].
Transforming the building stock, mobility systems, industries and urban infrastructure
will nonetheless require heavy investment and requires an integrated approach across all
government levels including housing, transportation, energy systems and simultaneously
employment, education and other urban services. This, in turn, leads to positive outcomes
such as better well-being, business opportunities, and increased growth for all [4]. The
pace of urbanization is predicted to be the fastest in low-income and lower-middle-income
countries. Focusing on the urban and rural poor as well as vulnerable groups must also be
considered for the urban transformation and development processes [7].
1.1. Positive Energy Districts (PEDs)
The emerging trend of positive energy districts (PEDs) is a transition towards more
energy-conscious behaviour that calls for extensive and innovative engagement approaches
and co-creation practices [9,11,12]. However, it is first crucial to define and understand
different types of PEDs. The SET Plan Action 3.2, JPI Urban Europe and the EERA Joint
Program on Smart Cities describe PEDs as follows: “Energy-efficient and energy-flexible
urban areas or groups of connected buildings producing net zero greenhouse gas emissions
while also having an annual local or regional surplus production of renewable energy.
PEDs require integration of various systems and infrastructures and interaction between
buildings, users and the regional energy, mobility and ICT systems while securing the
energy supply and a good life for all in line with social, economic and environmental sustainability” [11]. The European Energy Research Alliance (EERA) classifies three categories
of PEDs [13,14]:
1.

PED autonomous: a district having clear geographical boundaries that is completely
self-sufficient energy-wise. This means the energy demand is covered by renewable
energy produced within the district. The district is thus not allowed to import any
energy from the external electricity grid or district heating/gas network. Energy
generated in excess may be exported;

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

3 of 20

2.

3.

PED dynamic: a district having clear geographical boundaries with annual on-site
renewable energy generation higher than its annual energy demand. The district may
also openly interact with other PEDs as well as the external electricity grid and district
heating/gas network;
PED virtual: a district that makes use of virtual renewable energy systems and energy
storage located outside its geographical boundaries. The combined annual energy
production of the virtual renewable energy systems and the on-site renewable energy
systems must, however, be greater than the annual energy demand of the district.

Positive energy buildings or Plus Energy Buildings (PEBs) are also essential to mitigate
climate change. PEBs refer to energy-efficient buildings that ‘produce more energy than
they consume’. However, the concept of PEB is quite challenging in terms of, for example,
renewables, time span, emissions, and building type. Similar to PEDs, there is not one
definition of PEBs, and therefore there is a lack of technical solutions and business models
to support the development [15].
When integrating decentralized renewable energy systems in cities, upgrading the
district scale is much more beneficial than upgrading only one building. With PEDs,
renewable energy may be evenly distributed throughout the district which allows the
renewable energy systems to be installed in a much more strategic manner. Renewable
energy plants and storage may also be constructed on a larger scale, thus leading towards
cost efficiency [16]. With reference to replication of PEDs, the Smart City Information
System (SCIS) defines replication of PEDs as the possibility of transporting or ‘copying’
results from a pilot case to other geographical areas with potentially different boundary
conditions [8]. In other words, if a pilot PED was proven to work in one community or
region, it could be exported to other communities or regions (indigenously or abroad),
considering that the boundary conditions could differ from those in the piloted community
or region. Replication may also involve the management process that was used in the pilot
scheme or the cooperation structure between critical stakeholders.
1.2. Literature Review
Although many European cities are leading transitions to low-carbon energy, there
is no common definition, roadmap or guidelines to ensure the actual feasibility of PED
designs, mainly because cities are in planning or early implementation stages, According to
Zhang et al. [17], most of the PED projects are in the implementation phase, i.e., 26 projects,
and 17 projects are being planned. In total, 16 PED-related projects have already been
implemented or are in operation, out of which 5 projects have completed implementation
but have yet to integrate the energy systems into the existing local energy networks. The
remaining 11 projects are in the operation stage. At the moment, Norway is leading with
nine PED projects, closely following by Italy with eight PED projects.
Evidence also shows that real-life PEDs often go beyond the frames set by the definitions. As explained by Derkenbaeva [12] through their study of 11 implemented PEDs in
Europe, this is because the concept fails to consider the contextual factors that are inherent
in them: spatial (neighbourhood, city etc.); technological (energy system and infrastructure);
economic (funding, cost savings etc.); environmental (weather conditions and pollution);
and social (stakeholder partnerships, community etc.). According to the study [12], it could
be beneficial to view PEDs by combining a complex adaptative systems (CAS) approach
and the doughnut economics view. The CAS is a complex system that consists of a dynamic network of micro- and macro-interactions of component and emphasizes that any
single component of the system cannot be understood separately but must be explained
holistically as a system of components and their interactions. The doughnut view demands:
(1) not to exceed the ecological ceiling by exhausting the natural resources, and (2) to ensure
that every individual’s needs are met by creating a socially just space for humanity [18]. The
combination of the two approaches is valid as PEDs bring together agents (end users, companies, governments) and technologies to form a complex system, impact other parts of the
system and aim to resolve access to energy and climate change [12,19]. Krangas et al. [20]

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

4 of 20

studied the needs for supporting PED development using the European Cooperation in
Science and Technology (COST) Action as an expert platform. The study also highlights
similar concerns as raised by Derkenbaeva [12] that PEDs require a thorough understanding of a city’s contextual conditions, policies, priorities, strategies, and resources. It is also
essential that the city is well equipped with knowledge, skills and technologies to plan,
design, implement, monitor and replicate PEDs. Lindholm et al. [14] explored the essential
factors for planning and implementing different types of PEDs (autonomous, dynamic and
virtual) in different regions in Europe. The authors assessed the European energy market
by analysing the best suited renewable sources to integrate in PEDs (such as wind and
hydro), finally proposing an onion model to construct PEDs. The model proposes that
most of the PEDs can be built outside of the city center to produce more renewable energy
than what is consumed; therefore, they can export renewable energy to the inner city and
maintain overall self-sufficiency of the region. Zhang et al. [17] studied the characteristics of
60 existing PED projects in Europe such as geographical information, spatial-temporal scale,
energy concepts, and building archetypes to finally develop a PED database for knowledge
sharing and give useful guidance for future PED definitions. Mihalova et al. [21] studied
residents’ preferences for PED configurations in Switzerland. The study revealed that the
preference greatly depends on the resident’s car and home ownership, age, household size
and values.
Despite PEDs being a hope for dealing with climate change and having the ability to
transform cities into healthier environments, the journey leading to PEDs is indeed difficult as cities encounter similar challenges at various phases of their PED projects. Zhang
et al. [17] describe several types of barriers faced at each phase of the PED development
process such as the fact that administrative and stakeholder issues are evident in all three
phases: planning, implementing and operation, while environmental issues such as pollution reduction are evident only in the operation phase. Krangas et al. [20] revealed seven
prominent factors in PED development, ranked from highest to lowest: governance, incentive, social, process, market, technology and context. Good et al. [22] analysed barriers to
smart, demand-side interventions for neighbourhoods and districts and highlighted similar
challenges: political/regulatory, economic, social and technological. Similarly, SCIS [8] also
outlines four main clusters that require ample consideration when approaching replication
in a project: technical, financial and economic, regulatory and administrative, and lastly social (softer aspects such as stakeholder engagement). Bossi et al. [23] uncovered 21 success
factors connected to PEDs with the top 5 factors including stakeholder involvement, integrated technology, funding and business models, political support, and citizen involvement
and support. In addition, the study showcased 17 challenges that specifically highlight
legislation and regulation as a large obstacle. It is interesting to note, however, that the
success factors may become challenges, depending on the local circumstances. For example,
good political support in one city could make the PED project a priority; however, lack of
political support may create more obstacles in another city. Siddarth et al. [24] explored
10 questions related to PEDs and offered preliminary responses to each, such as the required
conditions to support rapid scaling, essential engagement and governance strategies and
reducing energy demand. In addition to expert advice, the study also highlights many of
the same key PED barriers as those observed in earlier studies including lack of technical
capacity and access to advisory services at the local level, inadequate citizen awareness
and mobilisation, lack of resources for the city to conduct systematic outreach programmes
and a tendency to have sporadic and ad hoc interventions instead of holistic deployment of
complementary measures for interoperability across interventions and sectors within PEDs.
Uspenskaia et al. [25] studied how Leipzig West could be transformed into a PED, the
challenges that occur in the process and how the Leipzig model could support replication
in other cities.
Rehman et al. [26] analysed energy technologies, control strategies and varying loads
to support a demo building to reach the positive energy building status in the Nordic
climate; however, the results revealed that it proved difficult to reach Net Zero even when

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

5 of 20

including all energy demands. On the other hand, a similar study performed in Italy by
Magrini et al. [27] showed the demo building producing an energy surplus and meeting
the positive energy building requirement; however, the demo building was located on the
outskirts of the city. This highlights yet again that PED boundaries have to expand and be
made more flexible, as provided by Virtual PEDs.
An essential point to highlight here is also the importance of stakeholder participation,
which is different from citizen and community engagement. Stakeholder engagement is
about engaging experts who will be responsible for implementing a strategy, while citizen
and community engagement is specific to a project in response to a strategy. Both are
equally critical elements of any successful PED journey [8].
As PEDs are multidisciplinary, they also offer an opportunity for social and organizational learning. Within the context of urban transformation, social and organizational
learning can be conceptualised as ‘learning that takes place in social units and occurs
through social interactions between actors and their environment and can lead to changes
in understating attitudes and norms in individuals as well as changes in social and organizational structures both formal and informal’ [28,29]. Social learning can shape rules,
norms, roles and power relations within established social groups [30] and help establish
new relationships, social structures and shared identity [31,32]. A broader and lasting
change will occur in the urban governance and stakeholder ecosystem if stakeholders
understand procedural, organizational and social aspects of the project [33,34].
1.3. Purpose of This Paper
This paper looks at the five cities of Maia (Portugal), Reykjavik (Iceland), Kifissia
(Greece), Kladno (Czech Republic) and Lviv (Ukraine) that are a part of an ongoing Horizon 2020 smart city project Sustainable Energy Positive and Zero Carbon Communities
(SPARCS) [35]. The SPARCS project has two Lighthouse cCties (Espoo and Leipzig) and
five Fellow Cities. Lighthouse Cities develop and test integrated innovative solutions at
a district scale and act as exemplars for their region in several aspects such as building
energy efficiency, maximising use of renewables, electric fleet and ICT [36]. A city can be
funded as a Lighthouse City only once under the Horizon2020 program. Fellow Cities
are cities that have yet to acquire the technical competence to become a Lighthouse city.
However, Fellow Cities are fully involved in a project from the beginning and work actively
to replicate specific solutions that have been applied in Lighthouse Cities. Participating as a
Fellow City gives cities an opportunity to possibly become a Lighthouse City in the future.
This study focuses on the five Fellow cities of Maia, Reykjavik, Kladno, Kifissia and
Lviv. This the first analysis of its kind as it walks through the energy transition experience
of each city until now, collects information on associated challenges and provides a future
outlook for each city with regard to PEDs. Table 1 shows the profile of each of the five cities.
It is envisioned that the analysis will also support other European cities in evaluating their
energy transition status and how to move forward in implementing PED solutions.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 1 is the introduction to energy transition
and PEDs. Section 2 presents the approach and method adopted for the paper. Section 3
presents and analyses the information collected from each city, and Section 4 provides the
discussion and Section 5 is conclusion of the paper.

Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW
Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

6 of 19
6 of 20

Table 1. Profile of the five cities based on project information and the study by Uspenskaia [25].
Table 1. Profile of the five cities based on project information and the study by Uspenskaia [25].
Maia

Reykjavik

Kladno

Kifissia

Lviv

Marine
West
Warm and Kifissia
Maia
Kladno
LvivcontinenClimate
(Köppen–Geiger Reykjavik
Warm and temMediterranean cli- Humid

Climate
(Köppen–Geiger system)

perate
(Csb)
Marine
West
Warm and
Coast Climate
Share of energy
demand
temperate
(Csb)
(Cfc)
covered by RES (% of
26.5

Share of energy demand
covered by RES (% of end
energy demand)

end energy demand)
Share26.5
of electricity demand generated by RES
(% of electricity demand)

Share of electricity demand
generated by RES (% of
electricity demand)
Renewable energy sources
in use
Other sources of energy

system)

Renewable
energy
45
sources in use

100
45

Coast Climate temperate
mate (Cfa)
(Cfc) and
(Cfb)Mediterranean
Warm

temperate (Cfb)
100

1.82

climate (Cfa)

-

-

1.82
100

tal (Dfb)

Humid
continental (Dfb)

2.05

-

-

Solar, partially
hydro and
wind
Coal, natural Coal, natural gas,
Solar, partially
None
oil
hydro and wind gas

Hydro,
geo100wind, so- Hydro,2.05
lar
thermal

-

-

- -

Natural gas
Hydro, wind,
Hydro,
(heating)
solar
geothermal
Note for Maia: % of RES in use in Maia depends on the national
production
(and gas
import)
Coal,electricity
natural gas,
Natural
Natural gas, oilThe values
None
infrastructure.
fluctuate in Coal,
time natural
and thegas
current value
is
an
approximate.
Note
oil
(heating) for
Kifissia: Kifissia does not own any RES production. The first public PV systems are being established
Note for Maia: % of RES in use in Maia depends on the national electricity production (and import) infrastructure.
through SPARCS. Note for Lviv: Lviv does not have RES production itself. The city is a part of the
The values fluctuate in time and the current value is an approximate. Note for Kifissia: Kifissia does not own any
united
energy system
Ukraine,
and itare
is being
not possible
to get
information
Lviv
separately,
howRES
production.
The first of
public
PV systems
established
through
SPARCS. for
Note
for Lviv:
Lviv does
not
ever,RES
Lviv
does provide
using
gas. energy system of Ukraine, and it is not possible to get
have
production
itself. heating
The city is
a partnatural
of the united
Other sources of energy Natural gas, oil

information for Lviv separately, however, Lviv does provide heating using natural gas.

2. Materials and Methods
2. Materials and Methods
As the process of implementing PEDs in any city spreads over several years and deAsmuch
the process
of implementing
PEDs
any city the
spreads
overhave
several
years and
demands
mands
detailed
data collection
andinanalysis,
authors
provided
a first
overmuch
detailed
data
collection
and
analysis,
the
authors
have
provided
a
first
overview
of the
view of the cities in a simplified form in this paper and will be providing a deeper analysis
cities
a simplified
form inFigure
this paper
and will
providing
a deeper
analysis
in the for
papers
in theinpapers
that follow.
1 shows
thebe
data
collection
approach
adopted
the
that
follow.
Figure
1
shows
the
data
collection
approach
adopted
for
the
paper.
paper.

Figure
Figure1.1.Schematic
Schematicdiagram
diagramof
ofthe
theresearch
researchmaterials
materialsand
andmethods.
methods.

2.1.
2.1. Knowledge
Knowledge Gap
Gap Survey
Survey
As
a
first
step,
As a first step, an
an internal
internal online
online knowledge
knowledge gaps
gaps survey
survey was
was conducted
conducted at
at the
the start
start
of
the
project
in
2019
to
obtain
a
full
picture
of
the
initial
situation
in
the
five
cities.
of the project in 2019 to obtain a full picture of the initial situation in the five cities. The
The
survey
well as
as topics
topics such
such as
as data
data governance,
governance, innovation,
innovation,
survey focused
focused on
on technical
technical aspects
aspects as
as well
business
The results
results served
served as
as aa basis
basis to
to align
business models
models and
and finance.
finance. The
align the
the needs
needs of
of the
the five
five
cities
cities with
with the
the two
two Lighthouse
Lighthouse Cities
Cities and
and also
also bring
bring the
the missing
missing knowledge
knowledge areas
areas to
to the
the
attention
of
the
project
partners
who
also
play
the
important
role
of
providing
continuous
attention of the project partners who also play the important role of providing continuous
support
support to
to the
the cities.
cities. Table
Table 22 illustrates
illustrates some
some of
of the
the information
information collected
collected from
from the
the cities
cities
during
the
survey.
during the survey.

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

7 of 20

Table 2. Topics covered in the knowledge gap survey and example questions asked.
Examples Questions in the Survey

•
•
Knowledge Exchange Questions

What do you expect from the Knowledge exchange?
Is your city interested in knowledge transfer (webinars/workshops)
regarding smart grids/distributed energy generation?
Is your city interested in knowledge transfer (webinars/workshops)
regarding open data management?

•

•
•
City Vision and Civic Engagement

Has a city vision been developed in your city before?
Does your municipality have a unit dedicated to project
management regarding energy and sustainability?
How do you think the local construction industry is responding to
sustainability and energy challenges?

•

2.2. City Vision 2050
The purpose of City Vision 2050 was to cover the key strategic areas such as energy
and mobility as well as any associated areas and to also involve policy makers, relevant
stakeholders, citizens and communities in developing a realistic vision [37]. A city vision
describes how the community envisions the desired future. It expresses the community’s
ideal of what it wishes to become and gives a sense of direction about where the city is
headed. The city vision is used as the starting point for transformation, usually defined
by political leadership based on strong participatory processes. The city vision workshops
were organized in all five cities of Maia, Reykjavik, Kifissia, Kladno and Lviv as well as the
two Lighthouse Cities during September–November 2020. The five cities, including the
two Lighthouse cities, also received practical guidelines on how to conduct the workshop.
The guidelines provided important information such as creating a schedule, forming a task
force, selecting key strategic areas and defining the status quo, setting up a participatory
process and conducting the city vision workshops. Depending on the city, the city vision
workshop could last one day or up to two days. It was organised by every city, respectively,
together with local stakeholders in their respective native language, and the cities could
decide whether they wanted a remote or a physical workshop. The cities will, nonetheless,
continue to update their vision throughout the project and beyond.
2.3. City Forum
City forums are an internal project event held every three months with the objective of
fostering knowledge exchange between cities and technical partners. The city forum held
in February 2022 was arranged and specifically adapted for the purpose of following up on
PED progress in the five cities and more importantly, to let cities openly discuss related
issues. This forum had more than 30 participants including city representatives and also
technical partners. The forum served as a complementary method to the semi-structured
interviews (Table 3).
Table 3. City forum questions.
What challenges are you facing in your city regarding PEDs?
What do you wish to learn from other cities?
What is your advice to a new a city that wants to plan PEDs?

2.4. Interviews with City Representatives
Semi-structured interviews were held with city representatives to allow a deeper
insight into the complexities of PED development. The interviews were held individually
with the five cities in March 2022, and they took place virtually. Since the research on

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

8 of 20

these five cities is particularly novel, the sampling of the interviewees was linked to city
context and setting. Hence, the interviewees were mainly city project coordinators and
local partners (Table 4). Furthermore, it is relevant to note that the interview responses are
from the project representative’s perspective only. The interviews are a continual of the
initial knowledge gap survey conducted at the very start of the project as well as the city
vision workshop.
Table 4. City representatives interviewed.
Interviewees
Maia

SPARCS project coordinator—City of Maia (1)
Technical experts—City of Maia (1), EDP NEW (1),
Porto Energy Agency (2)

Reykjavik

SPARCS project coordinator—City of Reykjavik (1)
Technical expert—Reykjavik Energy (1)

Kladno

SPARCS project coordinator—City of Kladno (1)

Kifissia

SPARCS project coordinator—City of Kifissia (1)
Deputy Mayor (1)

Lviv

SPARCS project coordinator—City of Lviv (1)

The interview questions were categorized into three topics: energy transition, PED
learnings and value and reflection and way forward (Table 5). The questions were designed
to elicit simple answers and to encourage the cities to share their experiences from being
part of the project so far. The categories and related questions reflect the project work
done in the five cities during the past two years and also reflect the fact that as a result of
participating in various project activities, the cities now have some experience to share and
have more knowledge about their respective cities.
Table 5. Research questions for direct semi-structured interviews.
Topics

Interview Questions

Energy transition

How would you describe your energy transition efforts? For example, the starting
point and where you are now.

PED learnings and value

Reflection and way forward

(a)
(b)

What were your learnings during the work?
What was the added value of PED development?

What would you do differently, if you could, to change or improve energy
transition in your city?

3. Results
3.1. Maia
The city of Maia is located in the northwest part of Portugal and has 134,988 inhabitants
(2020) with a density total of 1640 inhabitants/km2 . It is also one of the most industrialized
municipalities of Portugal and an important transportation hub. The municipality of Maia
started its work in the field of sustainable energy in 2012. The city of Maia made its first
energy matrix in 2014 where the city analysed the current state of energy consumption
in Maia. The city later developed the sustainability strategy and in 2014 the Sustainable
Energy Action Plan (SEAP) that consists of a set of technical measures, planned to be applied
between 2015 and 2025. One of the goals of the city is to promote a change in citizens’
habits and behaviours as well as to apply specific strategies against actions resulting in a
lower degree of energy waste and energy inefficiency. In Maia, energy efficiency is thought
to be achieved through various measures focusing on service and residential buildings, the
transport sector and public lighting. The city strives to create favourable conditions for

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

9 of 20

significant energy efficiency policy development by increasing its energy efficiency and
reducing energy use by 30% until 2020, 35% by 2030 and 45% by 2050. In addition, the
city has planned to retrofit its older buildings and to increase the production of energy
through PV. However, the city wishes to integrate all the policy documents instead of
having separate documents to have a faster approach for energy transition. Also, despite
having an energy and mobility division, the city claims there is a lack of qualified personnel.
Other obstacles include acquiring relevant energy data from stakeholders, lack of interest
of residents in sustainable behaviour, access to the best technology, regulatory barriers and
an unpromising overall economic outlook which leads to a lack of financial resources for
energy efforts. These obstacles lead to difficulties in planning and in communication with
stakeholders, further delaying the work. It also happens very often that the decisions for
the city of Maia are made ‘together’ with other municipalities which often does not create
favourable circumstances for the city of Maia. Working in developing PEDs has nonetheless
given an opportunity to learn how to scale up solutions and led to deeper discussions with
city officials.
3.2. Reykjavik
The city of Reykjavik is the northernmost capital in the world. It has 131,136 inhabitants and a population density of 480 people/km2 . Reykjavik is one of the cloudiest and
coldest capitals of any nation in the world. It meets all of its electricity and heating needs
from renewable sources (hydro 71% and geothermal 29%). Reykjavik is also the principal
owner of Reykjavik Energy and subsidiaries who generate and distribute energy, water and
waste in the capital as well as owning and operating the city’s ICT grid. Reykjavik was the
first municipality in Iceland to make a policy on the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions
in 2009. Among the city’s strategic plans targeting climate and sustainability issues is the
Reykjavik Municipal Plan 2010–2030. Approved in 2014, it aims for a 35% reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions by 2030 from 2007 and a 73% reduction by 2050. At the moment,
approximately 80% of the houses are currently heated with geothermal energy. Production
of electricity from wind will most likely grow in coming years following the rapid decline
of cost, but it is unlikely that PV will play a large role because of how far north Iceland
is positioned and because of the abundance of natural resources that allows it to produce
electricity and heating very cheaply. However, the transport and housing sectors have
not received much focus. The housing sector in particular requires much attention as the
city must think of ‘sustainable housing’ from scratch. Transport is the biggest emission
producer as residents are very much dependent on cars. The share of public transport
such as buses is only 8%, and other methods of commuting such as walking or biking
are only 19%. While the city witnessed a surge in electric vehicles, a new concern is to
sustain, develop and maintain the infrastructure to support the rise in electric vehicles.
Nonetheless, the city has provided several initiatives for supporting electric vehicles; for
example, residents can apply for funding to have a charging station near their home.
3.3. Kladno
Kladno is a city in the Czech Republic with 69,000 inhabitants and a population density
of 1852 inhabitants/km2 . It is located 25 km from the Czech capital city of Prague and
often suffers from the “sleep over city problem” as a stop on the way to the metropolitan
area. The municipality aims to raise Kladno’s attractiveness and create its own set of
niche-strengths. An existing good example is the e-bike sharing scheme at which Kladno
is the forerunner in the Czech Republic (first municipality in the country to start e-bike
sharing in 2018). Kladno has several strategic documents in different stages of development:
an already agreed Strategy of Sustainable Development 2014–2020, the SECAP as a result
of the SPARCS project activities, a sustainable mobility plan is currently being finalized,
and the Program for Regional Development 2014–2020 is already in place. Nonetheless,
the SPARCS project was the starting point of energy discussion in Kladno. There were
earlier discussions, but it was not connected to the overall strategy goal. At the moment,

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

10 of 20

the project activities are also supported by the pressure from the EU and the Green Deal
which create a much more encouraging environment. Since the use of coal is banned in
Europe from 2030 onwards, the country has to rethink energy supply, and this supports
the development of PEDs. However, the city still faces the obstacle related to bureaucracy.
It is challenging to persuade stakeholders as they lack time, or they may or may not be
interested in energy efficiency. Often, there are only a limited number of people within
the municipality who push for energy efficiency. The rest continue to have a ‘business as
usual’ attitude towards construction and energy-related topics. The city of Kladno feels
it must maintain the energy efficiency enthusiasm generated by SPARCS and continue it
with future projects as much as possible because once the city’s participation in SPARCS
ends, then all other energy efforts also come to a halt.
3.4. Kifissia
Kifissia is a municipality in northern Athens in Greece with 71,259 citizens and a
population density of 2095.85 person/km2 . Kifissia is situated 12 km northeast of Athens
city centre and is the head of the regional Northern Sector which consists of an agglomeration of 12 municipalities. The city is characterized by a Mediterranean climate with cool
summers compared to Athens centres. The city adopted SEAP in 2015 and simultaneously
the Sustainable Urban Mobility Plan (SUMP). Moreover, the activities included in the
subsequent action plan ultimately aim at improving social and economic well-being of
inhabitants while enhancing the local economy and employment conditions as side impacts
of the energy and environment-relevant interventions. Nonetheless, the city of Kifissia is in
the early stages of energy transition, where most of the building stock was built in the 1980s
and 1990s. Therefore, the buildings are not aligned with energy efficiency regulations. The
transport sector also comprises traditional cars that use fuel. The city, nonetheless, has some
plans for incorporating geothermal and solar PV into buildings. The first feasibility study
for electric vehicles has also been conducted. The major problem in the city is bureaucracy,
as many departments need to be involved for paperwork and approvals. In general, the
city must push for a change in its energy culture since at the moment the residents have
‘non-energy efficient behaviour’.
3.5. Lviv
Lviv, located in western Ukraine, is an ever-growing city of ca 758,000 inhabitants
with the population density that totals 4390 people/km2 . Over 100,000 citizens living in
the suburbs commute daily to study and work in the city. The greater Lviv agglomeration
has approximately 1,229,000 inhabitants. In 2011, the Lviv city council approved the
“Program of Sustainable Energy Development in Lviv by 2020” (SEAP). Its main goals
included a reduction of CO2 emissions and energy consumption (both by 20%) and an
increased share of renewables in city energy balance (20% by 2020). Preparation of the
new plan is in progress. The city also has a green city action plan and an integrated
urban development concept that emphasize e-mobility and renewable energy. The city
is a working environment for 25% of all Ukrainian ICT specialists, and the IT sector is
continuously attracting new businesses and professionals. A vivid start-up culture has
emerged around the Lviv ICT cluster. That, in turn, poses a great opportunity for further
development of the city set within a strong local innovation ecosystem. Energy efficiency
efforts, nonetheless, are very dependent on the municipal leaders. The housing in the city
is very old and requires refurbishment. Certain areas of the city are known as ‘sleeping
districts’ in which the buildings date to the Soviet Union times, and these areas are not
serving any function except being housing areas. The city believes that with the help
from SPARCS, the city could be rejuvenated. The key problem for the city is to attract
investment as very often the investors look for cities that are in a slightly better condition. In
addition, 30% of the building residents are older people who cannot co-finance the energy
refurbishment of the building which causes the work to halt. The city is also dependent on
importing natural gas from other European countries which often does not have a direct

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

11 of 20

line of supply, therefore increasing the price for the municipalities. This is also one of the
reasons that there is minimum expenditure on energy efficiency.
Sustainability 2022, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW
11 of 19
Analysing the five cities in various steps revealed interesting similarities, despite
each city being located in a different geographical location and having different starting
points for energy transition. Figure 2 illustrates the top 11 identified knowledge gaps that
were
werementioned
mentionedthe
themost
mostand
and selected
selected by
by at
at least
least three
three cities
cities based
based on
on the
the knowledge
knowledge gap
gap
survey.
survey. A complete
complete list of
of 64
64 knowledge
knowledge gaps
gaps is
is provided
provided in
in Appendix
Appendix A.
A. This
This helped
helped
with
with planning
planning further
further project
project activities
activities such
such as
as webinars
webinars and
and training
training sessions
sessions to
to support
support
the
the five
five cities
cities in
in the
the best
best way
way possible,
possible, as
as elaborated
elaborated upon
upon in
in the
the next
next section.
section. In
In addition,
addition,
during
five
cities
described
what
theythey
would
like to
learn
from the
other
duringthe
thecity
cityforum,
forum,the
the
five
cities
described
what
would
like
to learn
from
the
four
cities,
and
this
included
electric
vehicles
and
charging
behaviour,
digital
platforms
other four cities, and this included electric vehicles and charging behaviour, digital platand
data
management.
forms
and
data management.

Figure 2.
2. Top
Top12
12knowledge
knowledge
areas
that
cities
require
support
with based
the knowledge
gap
Figure
areas
that
thethe
cities
require
support
with based
on the on
knowledge
gap survey.
survey.

Table 6 displays the challenges that the five cities are currently resolving to ease the
Table 6 displays
the challenges
that
the five cities
are currentlyduring
resolving
to ease
the
implementation
of PEDs.
The existing
challenges
were highlighted
the city
vision
implementation
of PEDs.
werethe
highlighted
thefor
citya vision
workshops,
the city
forum The
and existing
were alsochallenges
raised during
interviews.during
To allow
better
workshops, the city
forum andfor
were
also raised
during
the interviews.
To allow
for a betunderstanding,
the categories
challenges
were
selected
based on studies
conducted
ter[8,17,20].
understanding, the categories for challenges were selected based on studies conducted
by
by [8,17,20].
An additional result of the city vision workshop was to highlight the key strategy
areas in each of the five cities (Table 7). By identifying areas of focus, the cities were
Tableto6.direct
Existing
PEDproject
challenges
in Maia,
(KLD),
Kifissia
and Lviv.
able
their
effort
moreReykjavik
strongly (REK),
and atKladno
the same
time
bring(KFS)
together
the
various
departments
within
the
city
to
discuss
common
goals
and
avoid
working
in
silos.
Categories
Local Challenges in the Five Cities
Maia
REK
KLD
KFS
Lviv
In addition, the
identification
of local
challenges
also enabled
better
identification
of xkey
Understanding
the PED
definition
and concept
x
x
x
x
strategy areas. Each
city chose
the and
keybureaucracy
strategy areas depending
on their
local
Legislation,
regulations
x
x
x context;
x
Political
x
x for the other four
x
however, it can be said that
eachpriorities
of the strategy areas are also relevant
Lack
of
leadership
in
energy
sector
x
cities
as the goal for climate neutrality and to meet PED requirements is the same for all
Governance
cooperation
between
municipality
cities. All cityWeak
activities,
whether
they
result inand
anpriimmediate or long-term result,
lead
x
x to
vate service providers
some learning and experiences. Table 8 shows each city’s learnings from PEDs and the
Lack of communication and capacity and high inx
added value of PEDs.
dividualism
Understanding of technologies (PV, BIPV) and
x
3.6. Limitations of the Research
technical implementation
The implementationEV
of charging
PEDs isstations
a long process withinx a city. The authors recognize that
Dataprogress
availabilityand
and use
a full picture of each city’s
work completedx in every aspect would provide a
Energy
infrastructure
to
maintain
load the
fromscope
ebetter understanding; however, this is beyond
of the paper.
The authors aimed to
x
charging
Technology
Energy calculations on housing
x
Replicating solutions in a given timeframe
x
Lack of trust in new “innovative” solutions
x
Low awareness about current technologies for
x
energy modernization and RES potential

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

12 of 20

provide a simplified picture of the current status quo and also highlight how each city is
currently moving forward with PEDs. With regard to replication, the five cities are currently
going through intensive project development which aims to support them in scoping up
to two projects. For this purpose, the cities and partners are in the process of creating
extensive implementation plans, discussing with stakeholders, and securing investments.
Further papers will follow to explain the implementation process in more detail and the
selected solutions for replication.
Table 6. Existing PED challenges in Maia, Reykjavik (REK), Kladno (KLD), Kifissia (KFS) and Lviv.
Categories

Local Challenges in the Five Cities

Maia

REK

KLD

KFS

Lviv

Understanding the PED definition and concept

x

x

x

x

x

Legislation, regulations and bureaucracy

x

x

x

x

Political priorities
Governance

x

x

Lack of leadership in energy sector

x

Weak cooperation between municipality and private
service providers

x

Lack of communication and capacity and high
individualism

Technology

x

x

Understanding of technologies (PV, BIPV) and technical
implementation

x

EV charging stations

x

Data availability and use

x

Energy infrastructure to maintain load from e-charging

x

Energy calculations on housing

x

Replicating solutions in a given timeframe

x

Lack of trust in new “innovative” solutions

x

Low awareness about current technologies for energy
modernization and RES potential

x

Availability of areas for RES installations

Financial and
economic

x

Lack of access to the best technology

x

Lack of qualified personnel

x

x

Continuous source of energy supply

x

x

High energy prices

x

x

Business as usual attitude

x

High dependency on private energy companies

x

Uncertainty: COVID, war, economic crisis

Social and
cultural

Environmental

x

x

Limited financial resources in municipal budget

x

x

Stakeholder engagement (who to involve and how)

x

x

Citizen engagement and commitment

x

x

Behaviour of citizens (non-energy efficient lifestyle)

x

Heavy use of private cars

x

Heat island effect, flooding, air quality
Water and waste management

x

x

x
x

x

x

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

13 of 20

Table 7. Key strategy areas identified through the City Vision 2050.
Maia

Reykjavik

Kladno

Kifissia

Lviv

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

Spatial Development

x

Mobility

x

Efficient buildings and materials

x

Green energy

x

x

x

Digital networks and eServices

x

x

x

Citizen Education
and Participation

x

x

Circular Economy
(waste management etc.)

x

x

Nature-based solutions

x

x

x
x

x

x

Table 8. Learnings and added value from PEDs.
Maia

Learnings from PED
development

Value that PEDs
brought

Scaling up of solutions
Understanding the
concept of PEDs
Realization that the city
needs more technical
knowledge
Better know-how about
the city situation

City vision helped
realize the challenge in
translating the
knowledge into the
city’s own reality
PEDs initiated deeper
discussions
Better relationship with
stakeholders

REK

PEDs encouraged new
efforts, such as taking
the life cycle approach
into use in the
construction sector.
Inspired and motivated
the city to fill in the gaps

PED has led the city to
think about other
sectors that should be
developed in parallel.
Renewed interest when
the stakeholders find
out that SPARCS is a
large European project
with several partners.
For example, the city
recently attracted 400
applicants for further
research into use of
electric vehicles and
load control.

KLD
Understanding the
concept of PEDs
Technical
understanding was
missing
Concerned about how
to raise interest in
energy efficiency
High energy prices
support PED
development

PED attracted a lot of
positive attention.
Realizing that PED
discussions are not only
meant for energy
balance, but they are
connected to people,
economy, urbanism, etc.
Allows to attract more
stakeholders

KFS

Lviv

Bureaucracy is an
underlying issue—this
leads to extraordinary
delays and consumes
much of the city’s time
resources.
Citizen and stakeholder
engagement could also
be done more
vigorously as citizens
seem eager to
participate in activities

Understanding the
concept of PEDs
Which technologies to
implement? Resolving
issues through
interactions with the
two Lighthouse Cities
and other four cities.

The project helped the
city create a roadmap
for itself.
Project webinars and
workshops also
continuously support
the journey and help
develop a system
approach.
The city also shares the
gathered knowledge
within the city
departments for more
awareness.
The city was able to
identify key strategy
areas to work upon
with the help with city
vision workshop
Establishing the city’s
first public PV system

The city gained new
knowledge about
existing solutions and
how they can be
implemented, for
example, how should
e-mobility be improved
through scooters and
e-bikes.
Became familiar with
how to integrate energy,
mobility and engage
stakeholders.
The city is looking into
procurement of e-bikes.
By being part of the
PED project, the city of
Lviv believes it could be
a leader in energy
efficiency in the country.
Identifying key strategy
areas to work on helped
understand how the
different sectors can be
combined.

4. Discussion
As many of the PED projects across Europe and beyond are still in the implementation
or planning phase, there is no comprehensive set of reference points and knowledge set,
as highlighted by several previous studies [14,17,20]. Evidence also shows that PEDs
demand a deep understanding of the cities’ local conditions, policies, priorities, strategies,
resources and solutions [38]. It has to be recognized that each city is different [14,39]
and has varying internal situations in terms of governance, stakeholder relationships
and institutional support mechanisms [4]. This paper focused on the five cities of Maia,
Reykjavik, Kladno, Kifissia and Lviv and their journey of energy transition as they try
to replicate and implement PED solutions. The paper highlighted how each city began

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

14 of 20

energy transition, the associated challenges that the cities face, learning acquired during
the progress and what has been the value of PEDs so far for each city.
By engaging the cities in surveys and internal discussions, it became clear what the
current knowledge gaps were, the current attitudes for energy transition and the overall
situation in the city. The knowledge gap survey revealed 63 areas that the cities needed help
with regarding PEDs. In addition, the top 11 knowledge gap areas that at least three cities
selected include: (1) green buildings, (2) business models, (3) microgrids, (4) smart mobility,
(5) open data management, (6) legal and institutional framework, (7) energy efficiency
awareness/usage reduction, (8) building refurbishment, (9) renewable electricity and heat,
(10) eGovernance and (11) land use planning.
It is beyond the scope of any city to resolve local challenges. Nonetheless, as claimed
by several authors in previous studies [17,20,22–24], the main challenges in the city revolve
around governance, technology, funding and community/stakeholders interest. These
were evident in the analysis for Maia, Reykjavik, Kladno, Kifissia and Lviv (Table 6). A clear
understanding of PED is an ongoing challenge for all cities. In addition, difficulties caused
due to legislation and bureaucracy are inherent in most of the cities. Lack of qualified
personnel and adequate technical expertise were also cited by the cities. Educating the
community and maintaining and aligning stakeholder interest in energy efficiency is also a
concern. Additional challenges included unclear national energy policies, different starting
points of each city, diverse technology maturity of the territory, difference in timing of local
city agenda and SPARCS timeline, and lack of political support.
The City Vision 2050 was the first step in triggering wider and deeper urban transformation efforts. Although it will be continuously updated by the cities in the years to come,
it will act as a point of reference for the cities. City vision brought awareness of the city
as a whole, and this will not only support current decision making, but it is expected that
the impact will go far beyond the project to influence future decisions, strategic options
and investments. Furthermore, city vision has a direct influence on project development in
Fellow Cities that aims to replicate chosen solutions in the next two years. With the help of
the City Vision 2050 workshop, the cities were able to identify key strategy areas that they
could improve and work upon in the coming years (Table 7). All five cities chose mobility as
a key area. Green energy was also selected by all cities, excluding Reykjavik as it is already
a leader in renewable energy. Spatial development, digital services, citizen education and
circular economy also received considerable focus. However, energy efficient buildings
were highlighted as a key area by only three cities.
The five cities have been supported from the start and will continue to receive support
to help them as much as possible in their PED replication efforts. The following explains
how the five cities have been supported to improve knowledge and expertise.
Packaged Solutions: To support the five cities in gaining technical knowledge, a set of
information packages based on cases from the two Lighthouse Cities was formulated. There
were 10 packaged solutions that included topics such as smart microgrid, virtual power
plant, smart home systems and electric bus systems to help to serve as a building block in
cities. Each city can utilize and adapt the packages depending on the local circumstances
and need. In addition, each packaged solution was organized in a structure format such
as benefits, functions, relevant business models and financing options and technological
options. The solutions have been made available online through the BABLE platform to
also have information available beyond the lifetime of the project.
Webinars and workshops: Based on the knowledge gap survey, a series of webinars
and workshops were organized for the five cities in collaboration with the Lighthouse
Cities. The goal was to enrich understanding as much as possible for the five cities. In
total there were seven webinars and seven workshops that were organized. The webinar
topics included governance models, citizen participation and introduction to some of the
packaged solutions. The workshop topics included green building and retrofitting, mobility
and e-charging and urban data.

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

15 of 20

Professional Training: The project also organized a six-month professional training
for the five cities where each city nominated up to four people to receive the training.
The training was to create and promote certified European smart city managers with a
focus on urban energy. The courses comprised distance learning modules and aimed to go
beyond the insights and expertise gained within SPARCS while also including best-practice
knowledge in the field of smart city developments.
The cities have a long way to go before the goal to become climate-neutral is achieved.
During further discussions, the cities also highlighted what they learned from their experience so far and how beneficial the PED related work has been to them so far. The cities
claimed that translating knowledge to reality is much more difficult than expected. As part
of developing PEDs, the cities also became aware that they need more technical knowledge,
have to involve citizens more vigorously and must continuously collaborate with other
cities across Europe to enrich their knowledge further and have opportunities to develop
and implement PED solutions.
With regard to benefits of PEDs, it made the cities realize that all public sectors have
to be connected and must develop in parallel, as seen in the case of Reykjavik where the
energy sector developed massively over the last years, but the transport and housing
sector have not advanced at the same pace. In addition, the cities claimed that City Vision
2050 will boost the existing city agendas and that the workshop brought together many
departments which will help in working together in the future. Moreover, in some cities,
for example in Kladno and Lviv, the stakeholders have shown a renewed interest in PEDs
as compared to the lack of support at the start of the project work.
When the cities were asked what they would do differently if they had another chance,
most of the cities claimed that they wished they had started the energy efficiency efforts
earlier, such as having fewer private cars. Other changes could include reorganizing the
energy sector, having more incentives, more funding opportunities, running all sectors
in parallel and eliminating all administrative and bureaucratic issues. Nevertheless, as
a result of the project activities and initiation efforts of the city, the city of Kifissia is also
installing its first public PV systems on two school terraces and wishes to include it as part
of an energy community. Moreover, the city of Lviv will be looking into procuring e-bikes
and improving the existing transport to help avoid the use of private cars, while the city of
Maia is closely working with the local energy company for the first time.
While it is beyond the scope of a city to completely eliminate obstacles, it may be
possible for a city to be prepared well in advance. As recommendations to new cities
that plan to embark on a PED transition journey, Table 9 illustrates the checkpoints that
a new city should refer to, based on the experiences of Maia, Reykjavik, Kladno, Kifissia
and Lviv. The recommendations are given in an order starting from acquiring thorough
knowledge about the city’s circumstances, expertise and regulations and walking through
other essential items such as exploring all funding options, being aware of available human
resources, collaborating with political leaders from the start, and being in continuous
communication with other European cities.

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

16 of 20

Table 9. Checkpoints for PED development based on the experiences of five Fellow Cities.
Checkpoints for Initiating PED Development in a City
1

Knowledge about the concept, best technologies, city context, regulatory concerns and baseline assessment

2

Prepare a clear strategy with goals. Define legal, financial frameworks and other required documents

3

Avoid large-scale projects in the beginning, start from small pilots that could give you quick wins and motivate

4

Establish a local task force and governance model

5

Establish local agreements with relevant stakeholders to assure data interoperability

6

Define the business models and explore all funding options

7

Analyse the current situation in your city

8

Analyse potential locations accurately to implement PED solutions

9

Ensure good project management from the start

10

Identify all possible challenges and needs

11

Have the support of the administration to ensure project ownership and awareness of project purpose

12

Do resource assessment (finance, employees, funds etc.)

13

Ensure close collaboration between city + technical partners of your city

14

Create collaborative ecosystem (colleagues, other departments, other city stakeholders, other partners incl. distributors).
Invite business partners, developers, investors, banks from the beginning. Engage the politicians and counsellor.

15

Provide an open data for planning and implementing solutions

16

Set up a data software solution and collect data regular or as much as possible

17

Get information from other projects for examples

18

Demonstrate advantages of new solutions

19

Be flexible as local city situations may change abruptly

20

Collaborate with NGOs and SMEs to reach citizens and better know the needs of citizens

21

Communicate with other cities

5. Conclusions
Despite the ongoing and long-lasting challenges, the five Fellow Cities agreed that
being involved in a Horizon 2020 project provided awareness and momentum to the public
and official body. In this sense, all cities have reported the added value of bringing a wider
range of stakeholders on-board and starting a conversation on the importance of the energy
transition in their cities as a result of the project.
It is well acknowledged that managing all the aspects of a smart city often lies beyond
the capabilities of the city authorities. Furthermore, experiences and previous lessons
are often not disseminated to the larger audience to improve learning and knowledge [4].
Accordingly, new and innovative forms of governance are needed in which various stakeholders, including citizens, could participate and influence the planning and decisionmaking process, development of initiatives and collaboratively address problems and set
future priorities [20]. Successful replication demands appropriate strategies, procurement
of technical solutions, integration of all city sectors, new business models and collaboration
with the private sector and citizens [8].
This paper was a starting point to disseminate learnings and experiences during the
PED replication in the five Fellow Cities of Maia, Reykjavik, Kladno, Kifissia and Lviv. The
authors hope that this paper could provide a first overview to a new city embarking on the
PED journey. Future research will analyse the project development in each city to replicate
specific PED solutions and to support the cities’ efforts to become Lighthouse Cities in the
coming years.

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

17 of 20

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Z.F.; methodology, Z.F. and K.S.; writing—original draft
preparation, Z.F., K.S., T.V. and R.Q.; writing—review and editing, Z.F. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by SPARCS, grant number 864242, and the APC was funded
by SPARCS.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Ethical review and approval were waived for this study, as
Technical Research Centre of Finland (VTT) follows the TENK guidelines which exempts the paper
from requiring an ethical review and approval. https://tenk.fi/en/ethical-review/ethical-reviewhuman-sciences (accessed on 14 March 2022).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We are deeply grateful to the SPARCS city representatives from city of Maia,
Reykjavik, Kladno, Kifissia, and Lviv for their valuable time and providing a very thorough overview
of the city0 s energy transition journey. We also want to thank our project colleagues from FHG,
BABLE and SPI in supporting us with information regarding the five cities.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Appendix A
Table A1. Complete list of knowledge gaps identified by the five cities related to PEDs.
Category

Building/infrastructure

Finance

Demand and distribution

Knowledge Area

Number of Cities Lacking
Knowledge

Green buildings

4

Building refurbishment

3

Efficiency upgrades in historic districts/general retrofitting

2

Life cycle consideration of construction waste

1

Energy performance certification (implementation)

1

Thermal insulation and passive energy efficiency improvement

1

Business models (smart energy solutions)

4

Public–private partnerships, investment, cooperation

2

Economic modeling of PED/smart cities

1

Proving financial viability

1

Smart metering

2

EV integration (data-driven)/bidirectional charging/V2G

2

Load management/electricity distribution

1

Demand-side management

1

Flexible hydrogen production . . .

1

Predicting demand/load patterns

1

Energy independence versus distribution system investment

1

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

18 of 20

Table A1. Cont.
Category

Energy production

Mobility

Data

Knowledge Area

Number of Cities Lacking
Knowledge

DG-prosumership, microgrids

4

100% renewable electricity and heat

3

Photovoltaics (PV)

2

District heating

1

PED planning and function overview

2

Wind

1

Energy storage systems

1

Exploring RES potential

1

Waste CHP (specifically carbon-neutral)

1

Smart mobility

4

Multimodal/active transit

2

EV uptake strategies

2

Public EV charging

2

Public transit investment

2

Bike infrastructure

1

Shared mobility

1

Changing charging behaviour

1

Increasing share of foot/bike/public transit trips

1

Open data management

4

Modeling tools for planning

1

Kera 5G/city and regional 5G legal implications

1

Data integration

1

Calculating energy balance of PED

1

Artificial Intelligence/IoT

1

Smart monitoring system

1

Energy burden modeling of buildings/city level

1

Efficiency increases in public transit

1

Interoperable and integrated data platform

1

PED impact assessment

1

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

19 of 20

Table A1. Cont.
Category

Governance

Public engagement

Knowledge Area

Number of Cities Lacking
Knowledge

Legal and institutional framework

4

eGovernance

3

Land use planning

3

Smart city policies

2

Coordinating with regional/national reform/regulation

2

Knowledge of national policy in energy, renewables, and
building efficiency

1

Project management unit for energy and sustainability

1

General public sector (utilities, etc.) development

1

Post-communist innovation process

1

Circular economy policies

1

Stakeholder management

1

Increasing R&D capacity, innovation potential

1

Smart city management structure

1

Energy efficiency awareness/usage reduction

4

Industry efficiency/engagement

2

Workshops and online surveys

1

Focus groups

1

Water consumption and rainwater collection

1

References
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

International Energy Agency. Energy Transitions Tracking Progress in Clean Energy Transitions through Key Indicators across
Fuels and Technologies. 2021. Available online: https://www.iea.org/topics/energy-transitions (accessed on 15 January 2022).
European Commission. 100 Climate-Neutral Cities by 2030—By and for the Citizens: INTERIM Report of the Mission Board for
Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2020. [CrossRef]
Amores, A.; Álvarez, L.; Chico, J.; Ramajo, G.; Azabal, I.; Urgel, J.M. The Future of Sustainable Cities: Urban Energy Transition to
2030. 2019. Available online: https://www2.deloitte.com/eg/en/pages/energy-and-resources/articles/future-of-sustainablecities-urban-energy-transition-to-2030.html (accessed on 20 February 2022).
OECD. Managing Environmental and Energy Transitions for Regions and Cities. 2020. Available online: https://www.oecdilibrary.org/urban-rural-and-regional-development/managing-environmental-and-energy-transitions-for-regions-and-cities_
f0c6621f-en (accessed on 20 February 2022).
The United Nations. The New Urban Agenda. 2016. Available online: https://habitat3.org/the-new-urban-agenda/ (accessed
on 22 January 2022).
Pulselli, R.M.; Broersma, S.; Martin, C.L.; Keeffe, G.; Bastianoni, S.; van den Dobbelsteen, A. Future city visions. The energy transition
towards carbon-neutrality: Lessons learned from the case of Roeselare, Belgium. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2021, 137, 110612.
[CrossRef]
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 68% of the World Population Projected to Live in Urban Areas by 2050, Says UN.
2018. Available online: https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/2018-revision-of-world-urbanizationprospects.html (accessed on 15 January 2022).
Ferrer, J.N.; Taranic, I.; Veum, K.; van den Oosterkamp, P.; Wilson, C. The Making of a Smart City: Replication and Scale-Up of
Innovation in Europe. 2017. Available online: https://smart-cities-marketplace.ec.europa.eu/insights/publications/makingsmart-city-replication-and-scale-innovation-europe (accessed on 10 March 2022).
Fatima, Z.; Pollmer, U.; Santala, S.-S.; Kontu, K.; Ticklen, M. Citizens and Positive Energy Districts: Are Espoo and Leipzig Ready
for PEDs? Buildings 2021, 11, 102. [CrossRef]
European Commission. Urban Agenda for the EU. 2016. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/en/policy/
themes/urban-development/agenda/#:text=The%20Urban%20Agenda%20for%20the%20EU%20is%20an%20integrated%20
and,of%20life%20in%20urban%20areas (accessed on 20 February 2022).

Sustainability 2022, 14, 5799

11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

28.
29.
30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.

20 of 20

JPI Urban Europe/SET Plan Action 3.2. White Paper on PED Reference Framework for Positive Energy Districts and Neighbourhoods. 2020. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/ped/ (accessed on 20 February 2022).
Derkenbaeva, E.; Vega, S.H.; Hofstede, G.J.; van Leeuwen, E. Positive energy districts: Mainstreaming energy transition in urban
areas. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2022, 153, 111782. [CrossRef]
Wyckmans, A.; Karatzoudi, K.; Brigg, D.; Ahlers, D. D9.5: Report on Attendance at Events Held by Other SCC-01 Co-Ordinators
2. 2018. Available online: https://cityxchange.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/D9.5_Report-on-Attendance-at-events-heldby-other-SCC-01-co-ordinators2.pdf (accessed on 18 January 2022).
Lindholm, O.; Rehman, H.U.; Reda, F. Positioning Positive Energy Districts in European Cities. Buildings 2021, 11, 19. [CrossRef]
Lavikka, R.; Rehman, H.U.; Reda, F.; Kazi, A.S. Positive Energy Buildings; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2022. [CrossRef]
Hukkalainen, M.; Reda, F.; Klobut, K. Positive Energy District: Ad New Puzzle Piece for Cities’ Energy Transformation. 2021.
Available online: https://cris.vtt.fi/en/publications/positive-energy-district-a-new-puzzle-piece-for-cities-energy-tra (accessed
on 25 February 2022).
Zhang, X.; Penaka, S.R.; Giriraj, S.; Sánchez, M.N.; Civiero, P.; Vandevyvere, H. Characterizing Positive Energy District (PED)
through a Preliminary Review of 60 Existing Projects in Europe. Buildings 2021, 11, 318. [CrossRef]
Raworth, K. Doughnut Economics: Seven Ways to Think Like a 21st-Century Economist; Chelsea Green Publishing: White River
Junction, VT, USA, 2017.
Bale, C.S.E.; Varga, L.; Foxon, T.J. Energy and complexity: New ways forward. Appl. Energy 2015, 138, 150–159. [CrossRef]
Krangsås, S.G.; Steemers, K.; Konstantinou, T.; Soutullo, S.; Liu, M.; Giancola, E.; Prebreza, B.; Ashrafian, T.; Murauskaitė, L.;
Maas, N. Positive Energy Districts: Identifying Challenges and Interdependencies. Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551. [CrossRef]
Mihailova, D.; Schubert, I.; Martinez-Cruz, A.L.; Hearn, A.X.; Sohre, A. Preferences for configurations of Positive Energy
Districts—Insights from a discrete choice experiment on Swiss households. Energy Policy 2022, 163, 112824. [CrossRef]
Good, N.; Ceseña, E.A.M.; Mancarella, P.; Monti, A.; Pesch, D.; Ellis, K.A. Barriers, Challenges, and Recommendations Related to
Development of Energy Positive Neighborhoods and Smart Energy Districts. In Energy Positive Neighborhoods and Smart Energy
Districts: Methods, Tools, and Experiences from the Field; Academic Press: Aachen, Germany, 2017; pp. 251–274.
Bossi, S.; Gollner, C.; Theierling, S. Towards 100 Positive Energy Districts in Europe: Preliminary Data Analysis of 61 European
Cases. Energies 2020, 13, 6083. [CrossRef]
Sareen, S.; Albert-Seifried, V.; Aelenei, L.; Reda, F.; Etminan, G.; Andreucci, M.-B.; Kuzmic, M.; Maas, N.; Seco, O.; Civiero, P.; et al.
Ten questions concerning positive energy districts. Build. Environ. 2022, 216, 109017. [CrossRef]
Uspenskaia, D.; Specht, K.; Kondziella, H.; Bruckner, T. Challenges and Barriers for Net-Zero/Positive Energy Buildings and
Districts—Empirical Evidence from the Smart City Project SPARCS. Buildings 2021, 11, 78. [CrossRef]
Rehman, H.U.; Hasan, A.; Reda, F. Challenges in reaching positive energy building level in apartment buildings in the Nordic
climate: A techno-economic analysis. Energy Build. 2022, 262, 111991. [CrossRef]
Magrini, A.; Lentini, G.; Cuman, S.; Bodrato, A.; Marenco, L. From nearly zero energy buildings (NZEB) to positive energy
buildings (PEB): The next challenge—The most recent European trends with some notes on the energy analysis of a forerunner
PEB example. Dev. Built Environ. 2020, 3, 100019. [CrossRef]
Pahl-Wostl, C.; Mostert, E.; Tabara, D. The Growing Importance of Social Learning in Water Resources Management and
Sustainability Science. Ecol. Soc. 2008, 13, 24. [CrossRef]
Ison, R.; Watson, D. Illuminating the Possibilities for Social Learning in the Management of Scotland’s Water. Ecol. Soc. 2007, 12, 21.
[CrossRef]
Rist, S.; Chidambaranathan, M.; Escobar, C.; Wiesmann, U.; Zimmermann, A. Moving from sustainable management to sustainable
governance of natural resources: The role of social learning processes in rural India, Bolivia and Mali. J. Rural Stud. 2007, 23,
23–37. [CrossRef]
Lave, J.; Wenger, E. Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1991.
Brown, J.S.; Duguid, P. Organizational Learning and Communities-of-Practice: Toward a Unified View of Working, Learning, and
Innovation. Organ. Sci. 1991, 2, 40–57. [CrossRef]
Bögel, P.; Pereverza, K.; Upham, P.; Kordas, O. Linking socio-technical transition studies and organisational change management:
Steps towards an integrative, multi-scale heuristic. J. Clean. Prod. 2019, 232, 359–368. [CrossRef]
Evans, J. Governing Cities for Sustainability: A Research Agenda and Invitation. Front. Sustain. Cities 2019, 1, 2. [CrossRef]
SPARCS. H2020 SPARCS Project. Available online: https://www.sparcs.info/ (accessed on 1 February 2022).
EU Commission. Smart Cities and Communities Lighthouse Projects. 2016. Available online: https://cordis.europa.eu/
programme/id/H2020_SCC-1-2016-2017 (accessed on 1 February 2022).
SPARCS. D1.11 City Vision 2050—Draft. 2021. Available online: https://www.sparcs.info/index.php/about/deliverables/d111
-city-vision-2050-draft (accessed on 25 March 2022).
Aghamolaei, R.; Shamsi, M.H.; Tahsildoost, M.; O’Donnell, J. Review of district-scale energy performance analysis: Outlooks
towards holistic urban frameworks. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2018, 41, 252–264. [CrossRef]
Kammen, D.M.; Sunter, D.A. City-integrated renewable energy for urban sustainability. Science 2016, 352, 922–928. [CrossRef]

