sustainability
Article

Multi-Criteria Decision Making Optimisation Framework for
Positive Energy Blocks for Cities
Maurizio Sibilla *

and Fonbeyin Henry Abanda
School of the Built Environment, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford OX3 0BP, UK; fabanda@brookes.ac.uk
* Correspondence: msibilla@brookes.ac.uk

Abstract: The Positive Energy Block (PEBlock) is a new paradigm towards low-carbon cities. However, there is a paucity of literature about methods and tools to develop PEBlocks in practice. This
study proposes a multi-criteria decision making optimisation framework for PEBlocks for cities. It
explores PEBlock scenarios based on adaptable criteria and actions applied to a block composed of
three school buildings, where only one acts as a positive node of the future energy network. Findings
point out the flexibility of PEBlock scenarios; firstly, selecting a list of 21 potential positive energy
scenarios among 300 possible combinations concerning the block analysed, secondly, individuating
the optimal solution and finally, comparing it with others based on the weight assigned to the criteria.
This study contributes to understanding the emerging properties concerning PEBlocks, discussing
their features and stressing main peculiarities compared to other models (e.g., positive energy districts). It also emphasises the PEBlock as a feasible and reliable energy infrastructure to support new
urban organisations (e.g., self-organised energy communities), drawing future developments and
implications. Limitations associated with this study are also stressed in the conclusion.


Citation: Sibilla, M.; Abanda, F.H.
Multi-Criteria Decision Making

Keywords: energy transition; urban transition; existing building; energy retrofit; positive
energy building; positive energy district; positive energy block; active building; socio-technical
perspective; optimisation

Optimisation Framework for Positive
Energy Blocks for Cities. Sustainability
2022, 14, 446. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su14010446
Academic Editors: Graziano Salvalai,
Marta Maria Sesana and Roberto
Lollini
Received: 15 November 2021
Accepted: 13 December 2021
Published: 1 January 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction
In Europe, buildings are responsible for ~40% of energy consumption and 36% of CO2
emissions [1]. In line with the Paris Agreement objectives [2], the EU long-term strategic
plan considers possible paths to accelerate the transition towards a climate-neutral built
environment by 2050. One of these paths is based on net-positive approaches [3]. Such
positive approaches involve buildings, building blocks and districts, introducing new
design considerations and possibilities [4,5] based on advanced managerial and energy
technology [6].
It is expected that the development of net-positive approaches will involve existing
buildings and their urban patterns rather than new buildings, since the number of new
buildings is extremely undersized to affect energy consumption trends on short–medium
terms [7]. However, the concept of effective retrofitting strategies for net-positive approaches is crucial, since most of the existing building stock is characterized by low energy
efficiency [8] and socio-technical implications [9].
Furthermore, net-positive approaches are also related to a high degree of penetration
of renewable energy sources (RES) within urban patterns, involving the re-definition of
the flexibility concept [10]. Flexibility has been a concept mainly related to energy exchange management with a specific focus on energy market rules [11]. Now, net-positive
approaches require an extension of the flexibility concept, including the spatial and managerial organisation of the energy network composed of an aggregation of buildings [4]. Thus,
flexibility is expected to be a parameter to assess the extent to which an urban pattern can
afford a net-positive approach. Furthermore, net-positive approaches call for synchronising

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010446

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

2 of 20

energy retrofit strategies and RES integration, taking a cluster of buildings into account
rather than at the building level [12].
Therefore, in preparation for further analysis of positive energy approaches, this
paper focuses on a Positive Energy Block (PEBlock), which is an emergent paradigm in
Europe [13]. The assumption is that PEBlockis a feasible and reliable new form of infrastructure to synchronise social and technical transformations. However, the organization
of an energy infrastructure based on a new generation of buildings requires profound
innovations from architectural, planning and construction points of view [14]. Indeed, the
organisation of a PEBlock as a socio-technical system advocates the integration of a multitude of criteria. These criteria not only come from different silos, but they are also highly
variable, depending on the level of detail and the level of information locally available.
Thus, it can be difficult for decision-makers to choose between the numerous retrofit
and RES integration options available in this scenario. For this reason, an adaptable model
that allows stakeholders and decision-makers to manage possible solutions efficiently
is needed.
In this regard, multi-criteria analysis (MCA) is a proper approach that can help
produce better decisions [15]. It is based on a wide range of approaches, which allow
decision-makers to combine the data available and their subjective preferences in an
organized way [16]. In addition, it evaluates a well-defined number of possibilities applied
in combination with specific scenarios, establishing a foundation for making well-informed
decisions [17].
Several studies explored the applications of multi-criteria analysis in sustainable energy
planning, focusing on energy transition [18–24] characterized by a set of conflicting parameters [25]. For example, Connolly et al. [19] reviewed approaches for evaluating the integration
of renewable energy into urban planning practices. However, the authors stressed that these
evaluations traditionally were focused on large-scale applications (i.e., country and regional
scale). Other studies took into account district-scale analysis [20,21].
However, district-scale studies focused on sectorial aspects of the energy transition,
such as the evaluation of different electricity production scenarios [22], emission reduction
targets [23] and the integration of renewable energy mix [26,27]. About the sectorial aspects,
Lund et al. [24] highlighted the relevance of multi-criteria decision making optimisation for
integrating synergies between sectors in organising smart energy systems at the local level.
However, this study mainly refers to the concept of district heating. In addition, Höfer and
Madlener [18] individuated a challenging situation in the fact that different stakeholders
have diverging interests and opinions on how the energy transformation should take place.
The authors stressed the usability of a decision making optimisation framework to discuss
with stakeholders about indicators and alter them if requested.
From these studies, socio-technical difficulties for decision-makers to evaluate potential energy transition scenarios emerge. It appears essential to develop a methodology
focused on transforming existing buildings into positive ones, supported by MCA to make
the approach scalable and replicable. This is particularly true in the case of the PEBlock,
since its properties and functionalities have not been codified yet. At our current knowledge, there are no studies concerning a multi-criteria decision making optimisation in the
realm of PEBlocks.
Therefore, without the presumption to reveal all properties and functionalities concerning PEBlocks, it would be interesting to explore PEBlocks’ organisation procedures,
taking into account the level of detail and information available (i.e., levels of uncertainty).
The Preference Ranking Organisation Method for Enrichment Evaluation (PROMETHEE)
is a possible solution to manage this exploration. This methodology can be used to find the
best alternative based on assessing specified criteria within a pre-determined scenario [28].
Thus, this study proposes an approach to identify a sequence of phases that provide a
concise and quantitative pre-assessment of the theoretical flexibility of a building block
to act as an energy net component. These phases are planned to be managed within
an optimisation procedure, which quantifies various flexibility metrics, such as energy

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

3 of 20

consumption and production targets, energy balance constraints at the building level and
positive energy block scenarios, taking into account different levels of information and
detail. This multi-criteria decision making optimisation framework for PEBlocks for cities is
offered as a contribution to operationalise PEBlocks according to a new generation of urban
planning practices and buildings. It invites scholars to think about a new set of criteria that
can drive the innovation in planning practices and approval processes, promoting PEBlocks
as a common practice. This paper is the first contribution in this direction, developing and
testing a workflow structure to transform a group of three buildings in a PEBlock.
The paper is organised as follows: the next section reviews the concept of PEBlock;
Section 2 describes the workflow structure and its application through a case study; then,
Section 3 presents the main results from a multi-criteria decision making optimisation
framework for PEBlocks; finally, Section 4 discusses PEBlock features, stressing implications
and pointing out some limitations and future research.
Positive Energy Block
The first definition of aPEBlock was provided under Horizon 2020. Itis described as a
group of at least three connected neighbouring buildings producing more energy yearly
than they consume [29]. As reported by the Strategic Energy Technology (SET) Plan, a
PEBlock can be considered the smallest component of a Positive Energy District (PED),
which is described as a well-defined urban area in which a group of different building
typologies actively manage the energy flow between them in order to achieve an annual
positive energy balance [3].
Therefore, both PEBlock and PED concepts are focused on net-positive approaches,
which involve re-thinking buildings as energy service [30]. In this regard, Cole [31] suggested moving the debate from defining energy-positive buildings to defining energypositive building contexts to add an ecological perspective to the energy transition. Similarly, Sibilla and Kurul [32] emphasised the key role of buildings and their surroundings as
components of a distributed renewable and interactive energy system as an opportunity
to re-introduce the local geographical conditions in designing buildings and cities. In
addition, Kolokotsa et al. [33] pointed out that the successful implementation of positive
energy buildings requires thermal simulation models integrated with intelligent sensors,
enabling interacting in real-time to support new functionalities (e.g., energy exchanges).
However, although it is expected that interactivity will bring significant advancement in
positive approaches, the diffusion of sensors at the district scale is rare.
Furthermore, several studies have embraced net-positive approaches at the district
scale. For example, Bossi et al. [34] collected energy transition urban practices across Europe
based on the concept of PEDs. The authors pointed out that at the early implementation
stages, the actual feasibility of many PEDs is not yet measurable. They stressed the
need for an open framework to facilitate the comparison of the results achieved so far to
emphasise local differences and diverse approaches in defining PEBlocks/PEDs. In this
direction, Alpagut et al. [35] developed a methodology to improve the scalability of PEDs
at the local level. The proposed methodology combines district and city scales, including
technical and non-technical parameters, to select a range of appropriate technologies for a
specific urban area. However, this methodology was carried out at the feasibility study
level. Thus, a procedure to transform buildings into new energy network components
was not investigated. Sibilla and Kurul [36] investigated this through a procedure to
define a hierarchical organisation of positive, neutral and passive nodes of a distributed
renewable and interactive energy infrastructure as a form of PEBlock. However, the authors
proposed a simplified procedure based on solar access assessment that failed to consider
other relevant parameters, such as building energy consumption. By contrast, the study
elaborated by Sougkakis et al. [37] was based on building energy consumption, exploring
energy retrofit strategies at the district level to reduce energy demand and promote positive
energy communities. The authors stressed that moving from building to district level is an
opportunity to engage local communities in the process of transition. However, further

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

4 of 20

studies are needed to establish suitable socio-technical criteria and appropriate methods at
the building block scale.
Regarding these methods, Hyytinen and Toivonen [38] investigated the concept of
flexibility and its relationships to net-positive approaches. However, the authors stressed
that innovation management practices should be developed in future energy services at the
local level to operationalise an energy system based on buildings’ nets. Rehman et al. [39]
tested a multi-objective optimisation approach in organising a PED. However, this study is
focused on a flexible combination of solar and wind installations to achieve positive energy
production in a specific climate situation. In this study, the role of energy retrofit and the
RES integration feasibility were not considered.
Furthermore, Good et al. [40] contributed to defining a smart district, posing a set
of questions about how technologies may be optimally exploited and how optimisation
should be carried out across time and space. However, this study is focused on flexibility in
future energy systems to establish rules for energy markets. Ala-Juusela et al. [41] proposed
key performance indicators for PEDs. They developed a decision support tool designed
to evaluate the energy positivity level of neighbourhoods. However, the indicators for
measuring energy positivity need further work in relation to targets and threshold values
concerning the dimension and typology of a block.
Therefore, what emerges is that transforming an existing building block into a positive
one is a complex process, requiring a dedicated approach to manage the progress of a block
toward becoming energy positive. In addition, metrics and tools to quantify the energy
positivity level are open issues. Therefore, managing flexibility to achieve a net-positive
balance needs an adaptable approach related to the level of detail and level of information
locally available.
2. Materials and Methods
The method adopted to explore positive energy scenarios concerning a group of
three buildings in a PEBlock was based on PROMETHEE procedure. This procedure was
adopted for its simplicity in establishing weights for each criterion. In addition, it allowed
us to offer the optimisation framework as an open-ended structure, becoming a platform
to discuss with stakeholders how to optimise energy retrofit strategy and RES integration,
considering that a group of buildings can act as a whole.
In order to develop and test a workflow structure to organise a PEBlock, this study
developed a building model based on the variability of the level of detail and informationconcerning various building components. These components include the opaque
construction systems’ thermal properties, BIPV system performance and heating demand.
Similar to prior studies [42–44], varying the levels of detail (LoD) and information (LoI) is
possible to explore the relationships between single building components and the whole
system. By doing so, this approach allows decision-makers to provide evidence about the
simplifications adopted, planning decisions and future model improvements accordingly.
The next section illustrates the workflow structure, stressing the procedure’s key
elements. It deals with developing amulti-criteria decision making optimisation framework
and a description of the framework’s components involved. Then, a case study is described.
2.1. Workflow Structure
A five-phase approach was adopted and organised in a workflow structure (Figure 1).
Figure 1 provides details concerning each phase, pointing out focus questions associated
with each phase and outputs.
In detail, the first phase defines the energy block profile. The second phase focuses on
creating a building information repository; the third phase compares and combines energy
consumption and production targets; the fourth phase identifies energy balance constraints
at the building level. The final phase assesses positive energy scenarios at the block level
through a multi-criteria decision making optimisation framework.

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

5 of 20

Figure 1. Workflow structure.

Furthermore, Figure 1 displays (on the right) a set of parameters associated with each
phase used to set the optimisation framework. It also presents the nomenclature adopted
herein. Thus, if no positive scenario emerges at the end of the process, the typology of
PEBlock must be revised (Feedback 1, Figure 1). By contrast, if a positive scenario emerges,
the LoD and LoI must be improved to confirm the feasibility of the solution selected
(Feedback2, Figure 1). Additional details are provided in the following sub-section.
2.1.1. PEBlock Typology
The first phase in organising a PEBlock is about the typology definition. According
to Sibilla and Kurul [36], the workflow establishes two options: homogeneous and dishomogeneous PEBlocks. Each option is based on two parameters: the building and
technology typology. The block is homogeneous when it is composed of buildings with
similar energy demand profiles and one type of energy system (e.g., PV-based systems).
In a preliminary step, the energy demand profile may refer to the main building activities

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

6 of 20

(e.g., school, office or residence). This is a common approach in energy modelling, which
adopts recognised international or national standards to associate consumption patterns
and activities [45]. By contrast, it is dis-homogeneous when the block includes an energy
exchange among buildings with different energy profiles (e.g., schools and offices) and a
mix of integrated renewable systems (e.g., PV-based and wind-based systems).
2.1.2. PEBlock Information Repository
The second phase is about the levels of information (LoI) and detail (LoD) available
concerning PEBlock components. The workflow sets a preliminary list of parameters
affecting the potential role of each component within an energy block. Thus, it takes into
account the urban patternand geometrical and dimensional parameters. The former can
have a relevant impact on using local renewable energy sources, such as sun and wind.
Indeed, demolishing the existing urban patterns to improve the quality of solar and wind
access is rare and often unsustainable [46]. The latter establishes how a building can or
cannot act as a positive energy building due to its dimension and form [36]. More simply,
large and well-exposed surfaces to integrate PV modules are needed to produce a surplus
of energy.
Similarly, modifying the building orientation or optimising its current form can be
impractical. On the contrary, these parameters are fundamental in implementing a new
settlement based on the PEBlock concept. According to Sibilla and Kurul [36], the workflow
considers a further family of parameters, the so-called solar orientated surfaces (i.e., horizontal and SWE solar oriented surfaces). It was stressed that solar oriented surfaces are
indexes to measure the extent to which a building can be a component of a PV-based
PEBlock, taking into account its solar form.
The LoD and LoI related to the parameters mentioned above are key factors in determining the flexibility and feasibility of a PEBlock. Establishing an appropriate LoD and LoI is
a typical design problem in using parametric platforms [47,48]. The need for a parametric
platform for positive energy scenario management was stressed by Abanda et al. [49].
2.1.3. PEBlock Consumption and Production Targets
The third phase responds to how to define consumption and production targets. It is
not in the scope of this paper to focus on the calculation procedure because the procedure
is based on a standard process adaptable to each context. In this regard, relevant references
are provided.
Thus, the workflow takes into account the Energy Performance Certificates (EPC) procedure, where the consumption target is usually classified from G-class (low performance)
to A-class (high performance). In Europe, EPC was introduced by Directive 2002/91/EC.
As a well-known procedure, it is based on evaluating the building envelope performance,
adopting a semi-stationary method as reported by UNI EN ISO 13790:2009 [50]. In this
regard, each EU country established a national technical procedure; for example, Italy
adopted UNI-13800-1 [51].
In order to obtain the range of classes, the procedure refers to the “reference building”,
a concept introduced by Directive 20210/31/UE. The “reference building” is a building
identical to the object of design in terms of geometry, orientation, geographical location
and intended use and type of system but having predetermined thermal and energy
characteristics established by the legislative framework. Thus, it is relevant to emphasise
that each building has its own “reference building” and thus a specific set of values
attributed to the range of classes. However, the concept of the “reference building” is
currently under investigation by several studies [52,53], and its application at the large
scale is emerging as a new topic [54].
Similarly, the energy generated by PV refers to the national application of UNI EN 153164-6 [55]. For example, in Italy the calculation procedure is defined by UNI/TS 11300-4 [56].
A detailed simulation of building-integrated renewable energy systems is provided in [57].

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

7 of 20

Therefore, three energy consumption scenarios were included: the current scenario
(Cs0 ), the “reference building” scenario (Cs1 ) and the highest energy class scenario (Cs2 ).
Each scenario requires applying a specific set of values to the construction and plant
systems level to identify the energy class. This set of values can be based on, for example,
an architectural survey, a comparative analysis taking into account the date of construction
and analogies or technical data from the original project. Regarding energy Cs1 and Cs2 ,
the value used refers to those generated by applying the EPC procedure.
Simultaneously, three energy production scenarios are considered: %Hs production
(Ps0 ); (%SWEs) production (Ps1 ); %Hs+%SWEs production (Ps2 ). The usable percentage of
solar oriented surfaces depends on the LoD and LoI available. As a preliminary step, the
percentage of usable surfaces was considered equal to 100% (i.e., maximum potentiality
related to the LoI adopted in this study).
2.1.4. Energy Balance Constraints at the Building Level
Subsequently, the building level’s energy balance constraints are assessed, calculating
the energy consumption and energy production balance. The calculation is based on the
simple inequalities (e.g., Cs0 + Ps0 < 0; Cs1 + Ps2 > 0). Thus, the combination returns two
macro ranges for each building (i.e., Xn ): Xn < 0 and Xn > 0. The former refers to a building
that cannot produce more energy than it consumes; on the contrary, the latter points out
that the building is potentially able to produce a surplus of energy. It is also possible to
establish an inter-range, pointing out results near zero. As a result, the flexibility of PEBlock
scenarios is described, establishing under what circumstance a single building can act as a
positive, neutral or negative node.
2.1.5. Multi-Criterion Decision Making Optimisation Framework
After defining the energy balance constraint at the building level, it is possible to
explore positive scenarios at the block level. Specifically, these scenarios refer to the
following alternative conditions:
1.
2.
3.

X1>0 , while (X2<0 + Xn<0 ) < 0;
X2>0 ,while (X1<0 + Xn<0 ) < 0;
Xn>0 ,while (X1<0 + X2<0 ) < 0.

The comparison among the above-mentioned conditions, at this stage, is based on
three criteria:

•
•
•

Technical complexity level (T);
Surplus energy production level (SEP);
Comfort level (C).

All these criteria depend on the LoD and LoI, and they can be analysed using basic or
advanced methodologies [27,58]. The former implies assigning qualitative and quantitative
numerical values to each component that composes the scenario. The second refers to
a more sophisticated algorithm and artificial intelligence techniques. According to the
scope of this paper, the first option was adopted. The simplifications adopted herein are
considered admissible since the scope of this paper is not to provide a tangible energy
balance, but it is about the description of a procedure, which can be improved through a
sequence of feedback and adaptations (see Figure 1).
Concerning the technical complexity level, it is plausible to state that it increases along
with building performance. For example, achieving the Cs1 target is possible to work
on the building envelope qualities (e.g., wall insulation level). However, achieving the
Cs2 target requires substantial plant system improvements (e.g., distribution, production
and emission efficiency). Similarly, it is possible to affirm that PV modules installed on
horizontal surfaces are technically simpler than vertical ones (e.g., vertical installation
always requires scaffoldings).
Therefore, Table 1 shows the numerical values attributed to each combined scenario.
A simple unitary scale was adopted so that an additional unitary value is assigned for

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

8 of 20

each variation in complexity. The scale assigned also takes into account that the combinations for X1 > 0 refer to a single building, while the combinations forX2<0 + Xn<0
involve two buildings. Thus, the maximum value of technical complexity levels is 14. This
value must be minimised. Table 1 displays this variation across energy consumption and
production combinations.
Table 1. Numerical values concerning technical complexity attributed to each combined action.
Technical Complexity Levels Associated with Different Scenarios
Combinations (X2<0 + Xn<0 ) < 0

Combinations X1>0

Cs0 + Ps0

Cs0 + Ps1

Cs0 + Ps2

Cs1 + Ps0

Cs1 + Ps1

Cs0 + Ps0

1

2

3

4

5

Cs1 + Ps2

2

Cs0 + Ps1

2

3

4

5

6

Cs2 + Ps0

3

Cs0 + Ps2

3

4

5

6

7

Cs2 Ps1

4

Cs1 + Ps0

4

5

6

7

8

Cs2 + Ps2

5

Cs1 + Ps1

5

6

7

8

9

The surplus energy production level is calculated as energy consumption and production combinations at the block level (i.e., X1 > 0 > Xn < 0 + X2 < 0). Thus, it is a quantitative
criterion which must be maximised. However, among the positive values returned by the
combinations, only two for each combination are selected to be returned to the optimisation
framework: the highest value and the nearest positive value to zero.
Finally, in line with prior studies [59–61], which confirmed that better energy performance of building components positively affects the users’ comfort perceptions, the
criterion of comfort level is based on a qualitative scale associated with the combination of
consumption target (e.g., high comfort: without Cs0 target; moderate: one Cs0 target; low:
two Cs0 target). Therefore, this qualitative criterion must be maximised.
Furthermore, these three criteria are linked to stakeholders’ perspectives, as suggested
by [18]. For example, technical complexity and surplus energy production may be associated with stakeholders interested in reducing the cost of transformation or exploring
financial investment. While the comfort level related to users’ perspectives focused on the
quality of the indoor environment more than energy production, the exact weight (i.e., 33%)
was attributed to all three criteria as a starting point.
The procedure was tested through a case study described in the following section. The
multi-criterion decision making optimisation framework was developed with the support
of Visual PROMETHEE, setting the main scenario and specifying the number of criteria
and combinations included in the problem resolution.
This scenario refers to a PEBlock composed of three buildings where only one building
is positive. In terms of problems, it is expected that the framework will help improve the
scalability of the PEBlock procedure to transform buildings into components of a PEBlock
across time and space. In addition, implications in weighting criteria were also analysed.
2.2. A Case Study
The case study involved three school buildings within three different urban patterns
located in Rome’s XI district (Figure 2). It aimed to assess the extent to which these three
buildings can act as a PEBlock. It also represented how public buildings can be re-organised
in new energy infrastructure, providing an example and the best practices to guide the
urban energy transition.

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

9 of 20

Figure 2. Case studies: urban patterns, building morphology and solar orientation.

Furthermore, Rome’s school buildings, especially those built between 1930 and 1970,
play a relevant role in defining their neighbourhoods’ urban and architectural qualities [62].
Consequently, the organisation of a PEBlock is promoted as an opportunity to enhance
thepublic buildings’ roles in the sustainable re-organisation of the city. The application of
the workflow structure to the case study is described below.
The block typology was established as homogeneous, both in terms of energy profile
and RES technologies (Table 2).
Table 2. PEBlock Typology.
Features

Homogeneous

Dis-Homogeneous

Description

Energy profile
Energy technology
No. of buildings

X
X

3

School building
IBPV-based

The owner of these buildings is the Municipality of Rome, which is responsible for their
maintenance. Considering that more than 50 school buildings belong to the XI district, it is
evident that involving this typology of building within a PEBlock transformation process
can profoundly impact managerial, financial and planning strategies of the Municipality
of Rome.
Furthermore, only the PV-based system was considered concerning the RES plant
since solar energy has a high potential in Rome, while the wind-based system was excluded
due to the low level of airflow velocity within the urban context.
Three simplified models were developed, taking into account dimensions, forms, volumes, position and orientation as LoD (Figure 3). Moreover, the main features concerning
the construction components (i.e., floors, external walls, roofs and plant systems) were
defined to achieve an appropriate LoI to set and run the EPC procedure.
Figure 3 shows the volumetric features of the three case studies, pointing out the main
differences in terms of construction systems. In this regard, the three cases represent three
completely different situations. Therefore, the cases “a”, “b” and “c” are characterised by
low (160 kg/m2 ), medium (300 kg/m2 ) and heavy (684 kg/m2 ) surface masses, respectively.
Table 3 reports the values to evaluate the building envelope performance, adopting a
semi-stationary method. It also reports the values established by the legislative framework
for the “reference buildings” in order to define the class range for each building.

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

10 of 20

Figure 3. Case studies: volumes, forms and construction features.
Table 3. PEBlock information repository.
U Value: Building—“Reference Building”
V
m3

S
m2

S/V
ratio

A
m2

Hs
m2

SWEs
m2

Wall
W/m2 K

a

25,461

9157

0.360

6697

2679

1310

1.10–0.29

b

28,389

10,336

0.364

5728

2280

1348

0.90–0.29

c

44,075

12,302

0.279

8924

2160

2740

1.33–0.29

Floor
W/m2 K

Roof
W/m2 K

1.49–0.29

1.52–0.26

Successively, building consumption and production targets are established according
to the Italian legislation framework [63] pursuant to the EU directive (i.e., 2010/31/EU).
Therefore, the consumption targets are classified by energy class, from G (low class) toA4
(highest class), while the A1class represents the “reference building” according to the
Italian legislation framework [64].
Table 4 reports the results from the calculation developed using validated software
(i.e., TermoNamirial v5.0). Consumption targets refer to the building envelope performance
in kWh/m2 and energy class. Production targets refer to the IBPV surfaces (horizontal,
SWE orientated and their combination). PV surfaces were set to100% of the oriented
surfaces. The potential production was calculated based on [56]. All case studies currently
belong to the E-Class.
Table 4. PEBlock consumption and production targets.
Cs0

Consumption Targets
Cs1

Cs2

Ps0 (Hs)

kWh/m2 —Class

Production Targets
Ps1 (SWEs)

Ps2 (Hs + SWEs)

Annual Energy Production (kWh)

a

131.17-E

87.45-A1

21.86-A4

501,508

192,282

693,790

b

115.77-E

61.82-A1

15.45-A4

1,777,809

301,636

2,079,445

c

103.14-E

61.65-A1

15.41-A4

1,683,000

1,099,818

2,782,818

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

11 of 20

Therefore, due to the energy balance constraints at the building level, each building
provides four possible solutions to act as a positive node. In detail, one is based on the Cs1
target and three on the Cs2 target, as shown in Table 5.
Table 5. Energy balance constraints at the building level.
Building

Constraints
Based on Cs0 Target

Constraints
Based on Cs1 Target

Constraints
Based on Cs2 Target
Cs2 + Ps0

a

Cs1 + Ps2

Cs2 + Ps1
Cs2 + Ps2
Cs2 + Ps0

b

Non-positive results

Cs1 + Ps2

Cs2 + Ps1
Cs2 + Ps2
Cs2 + Ps0

c

Cs1 + Ps2

Cs2 + Ps1
Cs2 + Ps2

These solutions were combined, considering the scenario established (see Section 2.1.5).
In other words, the combination refers to a PEBlock organisation where only one building
is positive, while the sum of the other two is negative in terms of energy balance.
As a result, a list of 300 potential combinations for each building was identified, of
which 220 are not admissible since they did not return positive energy scenarios. However,
from those considered admissible, only the combination that returned the highest value
and the nearest to zero value of the positive energy balances was selected. These two
values may represent two different stakeholders’ perspectives: a group of stakeholders
interested in maximising energy production, while another focused on maximising the
users’ comfort. This selection forms a list of 21 actions for the multi-criteria decision
making optimisation framework, characterised with the prefix “M” and “U” for the group
mentioned above, respectively.
The main results of the multi-criteria are presented in the next section.
3. Results
This section illustrates the main results focused on the following components concerning the analysis conducted: action impact comparison, criteria comparison and walking
weights evaluation.
Figure 4 displays the results from the calculation focused on the scenario where
building “c” acts as a positive energy node (i.e., c > 0). Figure 4a provides evidence that
the first combination (i.e., Cs1 + Ps2 ) can achieve a positive energy target only under three
combinations concerning “a + b < 0”. Figure 4b stresses the ineffectiveness of combinations
based on the Cs2 + Ps0 scenario. Here, only one positive solution emerges with a minimal
surplus of energy. Figures 4c,d show an increasing number of potential solutions in line,
of course, with the technical complexity. However, it is crucial to focus on the energy
production values in terms of kWh (see Y-axis) because the gap that refers to the same
combination of “a + b < 0”is relevant. This gap must be taken into account if the scope of
the PEBlock is to produce a substantial surplus of energy.
In terms of optimisation, Figure 5 provides an overview of the results obtained, listing
the actions selected for the multi-criteria decision making optimisation framework and
reporting the corresponded values. In addition, Figure 5 clarifies the reference scenario
(i.e., one building > 0; two buildings < 0) and the three criteria used (T, SEP and C), weighted
with the same unitary index at this analysis stage. In order to allow the comparison
among the actions, simple statistical values are included (i.e., min, max, average and

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

12 of 20

standard deviation). In addition, max and min values for each criterion are highlighted
with green and red, respectively. The results yield seven optimal solutions for surplus
energy production above average. However, this number decreases to four when the
surplus energy production criterion is associated with the other two. For example, the
action U4_C > 0 has the best value concerning two criteria (i.e., surplus energy production
and comfort), but the worst concerning the technical complexity. It is possible to observe
that the highest comfort level is usually achieved by the high impact concerning the
technical complexity criterion. In this regard, it is interesting to note an exception related
to the action U1_C > 0, which reports a value concerning the technical complexity criterion
under the average while showing the highest comfort level.

Figure 4. Actions for the multi-criteria decision making optimisation framework. The subgraph
reports the energy balance value for each combination.

Figure 6 shows the actions comparison. First, it was divided into four-diamond charts,
comparing the hierarchical distribution of actions applied to every building (Figure 6a–c).
The values are normalised, considering a scale from −1 to +1. Actions that intersect the
green bar are optimal. In detail, four potential positive actions were identified at the
building level for building “a” and three both for building “b” and “c”. These actions will
require an additional level of information to assess their feasibility. Then, each optimal
solution at the building scale was compared at the block scale (Figure 6d). Results show
that the feasibility concerning building “c” to act as an active node of the PEBlock is more
remarkable than “b” and “a”.
Therefore, as a final result, the procedure established a hierarchical organisation of
energy retrofit actions affecting the building scale; in addition, it pointed out the hierarchical
organisation of the buildings as components of the block within the scenario where only
one building is an active node.
Figure 7 shows the criteria comparison based on technical complexity, surplus energy
production and comfort level. Also, in this case, the values are normalised on a scale from
−1 to +1. Criteria with values under zero must be considered critical. The dimension of
the bar provides evidence of the impact of such a value within the action.

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

13 of 20

Figure 5. Actions for the multi-criteria decision making optimisation framework.

Findings point out the optimal solution; U1_C > 0 is represented by a high comfort
level and a medium level of technical complexity and energy production. Interestingly,
only one solution emerges with positive values for all the criteria at the current level of
information available. However, the procedure allows us to visualise other opportunities.
For example, U4_C > 0 shows the highest value of the energy production criterion. In detail,
this value is 793, which is much higher than U1_C > 0 (256). These results can be helpful to
drive further evaluations on buildings extending or deepening the criteria of analysis.

1

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

14 of 20

Figure 6. Actions comparison.

Furthermore, to define the optimal solution, weighting every single criterion is essential. In this regard, Figure 8 compares the results returned from the variation of the weight
assigned, taking into account the three criteria established (T, SEP and C). Figure 8 displays
the line at 33%, representing the values when each criterion has the same weight. The
range from 0 to 100% shows how each action varies for the assigned weight. Focusing on
this line, it emerges that the U1_C > 0 action (marked in yellow) has a significant positive
gap compared toothers. It is the only action that, while varying, remains above the zero
line. Incontrast, if one focuses on the criterion of surplus energy production, the action
U4_C > 0isat the top of the hierarchical classification. Nevertheless, Figure 8 provides
evidence that this action is placed at the minimum regarding the technical complexity
level. However, these variations depend on a preliminary LoD and LoI. Thus, as feedback
reported in this procedure, it would be interesting to improve the level of detail concerning
exclusively U1_C > 0 and U4_C > 0 to establish a more detailed comparison.

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

15 of 20

Figure 7. Criteria impact comparison.

Figure 8. Walking weights evaluation.

In conclusion, the procedure results allow decision-makers to work within a complex
scenario composed of a set of actions and criteria, establishing a range of weights related
to a specific circumstance. The significance and usability of the approach proposed to
operationalise PEBlocks at the local level is discussed next.
4. Discussion
This study developed and tested a multi-criteria decision making optimisation framework to drive the transformation of a group of existing buildings in a Positive Energy
Block. The literature review stressed how the PEBlock is an emerging paradigm and, in this
regard, procedures and measurements have not been codified yet. Therefore, this study
dealt with an approach to putting a PEBlock into practice.
The approach adopted identified a set of criteria and actions, which were compared to
achieve a net-positive balance. It was based on the concept of flexibility and related to the
level of detail and level of information locally available. It promotes a strategic approach
concerning PEBlock organisation, which may be seen as a process to establish a new form of
(self-organised) energy communities, going beyond a mere technical resolution of reducing
the energy demand.

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

16 of 20

The analysis (see Figure 4) showed that to achieve positive energy is not easy and
it requires the combination of energy retrofit and PV integration distributed among the
buildings which compose the block. Therefore, findings corroborate the idea of Sougkakis
et al. [37], who stressed the need of procedures allowing decision-makers to combine a set
of variables on which to plan the optimal combination of strategies throughout suitable
criteria. In addition, in line with Sibilla and Kurul [36], results focused on how to organise a
hierarchical organisation of positive, neutral and passive nodes (i.e., buildings) as PEBlock
components. This study further contributes to putting such a hierarchical organisation
process into practice, introducing an adaptable and expandable set of criteria to describe
the level of information related to the buildings analysed. By doing so, the procedure
provides additional measurable parameters to establish appropriate measures to configure
PEBlocks. These findings support previous research in the area of low-carbon transition
(e.g., [35]), which links methodologies to improve the scalability of new forms of energy
systems integrated at the district level.
Furthermore, according to Cole [31], the procedure developed emphasises that the
PEBlock is not a simple extension of the net-zero energy concept. Indeed, the PEBlock
offers new design considerations and promises. In this regard, our findings identify the
role of a building as a part of energy infrastructure. As a component of a system, a
building is involved in long-term transformation processes. The term system, herein, refers
both to urban configuration and the technical apparatus as a whole. This means that the
key variables will require a series of negotiations and agreements among stakeholders.
Therefore, our findings may be helpful to establish the weight of the parameters (see
Figure 8) according to emerging needs. Moreover, our approach is not simply focused on
achieving a positive energy solution but aims to reconcile urban pattern transformations
and energy infrastructure evolution to drive the direction toward a low-carbon society. In
this regard, additional criteria and actions may be included in the process.
Regarding the technical feasibility concerning a PEBlock as an energy infrastructure,
the findings from this study corroborate that of Kolokotsa et al. [33], whose results mark
the road towards positive energy approaches, envisioning the dissemination of predictive
control schemes. Undoubtedly, the dissemination of sensors at scale will bring significant
advancement in reducing the energy performance gap. However, this represents only a
part of the technological innovation that the PEBlock requires to be a reliable energy system.
By contrast, our findings seek to extend the effective implementation of the PEBlock as a
socio-technical system, promoting an approach to synchronising energy planning measures
at scale, not only on the bases of energy consumption and demand relationships but also
as a tool to regenerate buildings and part of the city. Here, the relevance of the procedure
adaptability and peculiarities concerning local contexts can be included as criteria of
the process.
Therefore, this study has provided an open framework that, in line with the results of
Bossi et al. [34], can help establish practical strategies for energy transition within a specific
urban context. However, while Bossi et al. focused on a PED agenda, this work pursues a
PEBlock framework. Although the PEBlock and PED are two different models, they can
co-exist. This is because buildings belonging to a PEBlock can be part of a PED.
The substantial difference is that the PED model works within an urban boundary.
Thus, strategies and actions are applied within a well-defined urban area. By contrast,
thePEBlock model works by selecting potential buildings. It does not require the definition of an urban boundary, but it entails a list of buildings called to work in association.
Therefore, while other studies (e.g., [39]) tested a multi-objective optimisation approach
in organising a PED, this study has proposed PEBlocks as a solution to spread micro
low-carbon infrastructure across neighbourhoods, based on a comparison, which takes into
account both buildings and urban context peculiarities. Thus, in line with the results of
Good et al. [40], our procedure seeks to achieve an optimal solution across time and space.
Currently, buildings must be placed close to each other because of technical limitations
concerning PEBlocks. However, it is expected that these limitations will be outdated

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

17 of 20

(e.g., commercialisation of superconductors or energy storage technologies). In addition,
from a social perspective, it is expected that the paradigm of the PEBlock will affect the
organisation of self-organised energy communities. This is because energy communities
will be based on the possibility of activating peer-to-peer energy exchanges depending on
the potential offered by every building.
Therefore, according to the results of Hyytinen and Toivonen [38], our findings create
the background to link the energy service perspective to the perspective of socio-technical
transition. Indeed, this study, stressing the potential role of a building within a network
of nodes (i.e., active, neutral and passive nodes), raises the need for a new generation of
bottom-up and top-down planning processes driven by an appropriate set of innovative
tools. As a consequence, the organisation of a PEBlock requires the definition of policy
instruments and governance structures, which support their configuration, the so-called
technological support network [32]. Hence, our procedure allows decision-makers to
work within a framework to develop innovative managerial practices, develop niches of
innovation and test to establish distributed renewable and interactive systems as reliable
and feasible alternative socio-technical systems.
5. Conclusions
In conclusion, this study has provided a characterisation of the concept of PEBlocks,
developing a preliminary tool to operationalise them. This was conducted by emphasising
some issues concerning PEBlocks and stressing their relevance as tools to synchronise social
and technical transformation, pointing out the role of PEBlocks in implementing new forms
of environmental and spatial organisation such as self-organised energy communities.
In detail, this paper has:

•
•

•
•
•
•

Established a set of three preliminary criteria, which can be extended by taking into
account the LoD and LoI locally available.
Selected a list of 21 potential positive energy scenarios among 300 possible combinations concerning a block composed of three buildings, where only one acts as a
positive node.
Individuated the optimal solution (U1_C > 0) represented by a high level of comfort
and a medium level of technical complexity and energy production.
Compared the optimal solution individuated with others based on the weight assigned to the criteria, stressing possible variations and feedback.
Developed a multi-criteria optimisation framework to manage PEBlock organisation
across time and space.
Discussed the PEBlock as a feasible and reliable socio-technical infrastructure.

The procedure has some limitations. The first limitation concerns the number of
criteria adopted. However, it was clearly stated that the structure of such criteria could
be adapted in quality and quantity. In this regard, this procedure was offered as an openended structure. It can be modified depending on the local peculiarities and scopes. Its
structure is horizontally (e.g., new criteria) and vertically (e.g., improving the criteria
accuracy) expandable. Thus, it refers to the ability to work within a level of uncertainty,
developing plausible and flexible scenarios. A second limitation is the accuracy of the
quantitative and qualitative values attributed to the adopted criteria. In terms of surplus
energy production and comfort, for example, they can be improved according to the level
of detail associated with the buildings involved. The numerical values assigned to measure
the technical complexity can be associated with more sophisticated algorithms, which can
better represent the distance in terms of feasibility between the combinations adopted.
Improving the accuracy of the criteria is also associated with new research areas. One
of the future branches of research is related to the development of digital twin platforms
for PEBlocks. It is well-known that the digital twin platform works by taking into account
the level of information and level of detail associated with the project’s components. A
dedicated digital twin platform for PEBlocks may be practical to make evident the level of
information and detail associated with each criterion. In addition, the development of a

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

18 of 20

dedicated digital platform may increase the applicability and reliability of this study. For
example, qualitative indicators such as the comfort criterion could be evaluated quantitatively or integrated with statistical analysis. Similarly, the PEBlock organisation processes
can be integrated with fuzzy logic system techniques to include a vast number of buildings
instead to be limited to three. This also opens new research avenues in energy modelling
based on new concepts such as PEBlock reference rather than building reference to develop
new business models, making PEBlocks a reliable and feasible sustainable energy system.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, M.S.; methodology, M.S. and F.H.A.; analysis, M.S.;
writing—original draft preparation, M.S.; writing—review and editing, M.S. and F.H.A.; project
administration, M.S.; funding acquisition, M.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Oxford Brookes’ Research Excellence Award grant number
[REA 20-21- A310249]. The APC was funded by Oxford Brookes University.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.

European Construction Sector Observatory. Improving Energy and Resource Efficiency; European Construction Sector Observatory:
Brussels, Belgium, 2018.
UNFCCC. Adoption of the Paris Agreement: Proposal by the President to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. In Proceedings of the Paris Climate Change Conference, Paris, France, 12 December 2015.
JPI Urban Europe/SET Plan Action 3.2. White Paper on PED Reference Framework White Paper on Reference Framework for Positive
Energy Districts and Neighbourhoods; Austrian Research Promotion Agency: Wien, Austria, 2020; pp. 1–22.
Cole, R.J.; Fedoruk, L. Shifting from Net-Zero to Net-Positive Energy Buildings. Build. Res. Inf. 2015, 43, 111–120. [CrossRef]
Sibilla, M. Developing a Process-Oriented Approach towards Positive Energy Blocks: The Wind-Analysis Contribution. City
Territ. Archit. 2021, 8, 11. [CrossRef]
Dracou, M.K.; Santamouris, M.; Papanicolas, C.N. Achieving Nearly Zero Energy Buildings in Cyprus, through Building
Performance Simulations, Based on the Use of Innovative Energy Technologies. Energy Procedia 2017, 134, 636–644. [CrossRef]
Ma, Z.; Cooper, P.; Daly, D.; Ledo, L. Existing Building Retrofits: Methodology and State-of-the-Art. Energy Build. 2012, 55,
889–902. [CrossRef]
Shnapp, S.; Paci, D.; Bertoldi, P. Enabling Positive Energy Districts across Europe: Energy Efficiency Couples Renewable Energy;
Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2020.
Sibilla, M. A Meaningful Mapping Approach for the Complex Design. Int. J. Des. Sci. Technol. 2017, 23, 41–78.
Junker, R.G.; Azar, A.G.; Lopes, R.A.; Lindberg, K.B.; Reynders, G.; Relan, R.; Madsen, H. Characterizing the Energy Flexibility of
Buildings and Districts. Appl. Energy 2018, 225, 175–182. [CrossRef]
Ge, X.; Kremers, E.; Yadack, M.; Eicker, U. Simulation-Supported Quantification of Flexibility: Assessing the Potential for Blocks
of Buildings to Participate in Demand Response Markets. In Proceedings of the International Conference on the European Energy
Market, EEM, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 18–20 September 2019; pp. 1–6.
Lindholm, O.; Rehman, H.U.; Reda, F. Positioning Positive Energy Districts in European Cities. Buildings 2021, 11, 19. [CrossRef]
Blumberga, A.; Vanaga, R.; Freimanis, R.; Blumberga, D.; Antužs, J.; Krastin, š, A.; Jankovskis, I.; Bondars, E.; Treija, S. Transition
from Traditional Historic Urban Block to Positive Energy Block. Energy 2020, 202, 117485. [CrossRef]
Ahlers, D.; Driscoll, P.; Wibe, H.; Wyckmans, A. Co-Creation of Positive Energy Blocks. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2019,
352, 012060. [CrossRef]
Dirutigliano, D.; Delmastro, C.; Moghadam, S.T. Energy Efficient Urban Districts: A Multi-Criteria Application for Selecting
Retrofit Actions. Int. J. Heat Technol. 2017, 35, S49–S57. [CrossRef]
Diaz-Balteiro, L.; González-Pachón, J.; Romero, C. Measuring Systems Sustainability with Multi-Criteria Methods: A Critical
Review. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2017, 258, 607–616. [CrossRef]
Kowalski, K.; Stagl, S.; Madlener, R.; Omann, I. Sustainable Energy Futures: Methodological Challenges in Combining Scenarios
and Participatory Multi-Criteria Analysis. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2009, 197, 1063–1074. [CrossRef]
Höfer, T.; Madlener, R. A Participatory Stakeholder Process for Evaluating Sustainable Energy Transition Scenarios. Energy Policy
2020, 139, 111277. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.

43.
44.
45.

46.
47.

19 of 20

Connolly, D.; Lund, H.; Mathiesen, B.V.; Leahy, M. A Review of Computer Tools for Analysing the Integration of Renewable
Energy into Various Energy Systems. Appl. Energy. 2010, 87, 1059–1082. [CrossRef]
Sinha, S.; Chandel, S.S. Review of Software Tools for Hybrid Renewable Energy Systems. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014, 32,
192–205. [CrossRef]
Allegrini, J.; Orehounig, K.; Mavromatidis, G.; Ruesch, F.; Dorer, V.; Evins, R. A Review of Modelling Approaches and Tools for
the Simulation of District-Scale Energy Systems. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2015, 52, 1391–1404. [CrossRef]
Ribeiro, F.; Ferreira, P.; Araújo, M. Evaluating Future Scenarios for the Power Generation Sector Using a Multi-Criteria Decision
Analysis (MCDA) Tool: The Portuguese Case. Energy. 2013, 52, 126–136. [CrossRef]
Marinakis, V.; Doukas, H.; Xidonas, P.; Zopounidis, C. Multicriteria Decision Support in Local Energy Planning: An Evaluation of
Alternative Scenarios for the Sustainable Energy Action Plan. Omega 2017, 69, 1–16. [CrossRef]
Lund, H.; Duic, N.; Østergaard, P.A.; Mathiesen, B.V. Smart Energy Systems and 4th Generation District Heating. Energy 2016,
110, 1–4. [CrossRef]
Janeiro, L.; Patel, M.K. Choosing Sustainable Technologies. Implications of the Underlying Sustainability Paradigm in the
Decision-Making Process. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, 105, 438–446. [CrossRef]
Ascione, F.; Bianco, N.; De Masi, R.F.; De Stasio, C.; Mauro, G.M.; Vanoli, G.P. Multi-Objective Optimization of the Renewable
Energy Mix for a Building. Appl. Therm. Eng. 2016, 101, 612–621. [CrossRef]
Visa, I.; Moldovan, M.D.; Comsit, M.; Duta, A. Improving the Renewable Energy Mix in a Building toward the Nearly Zero
Energy Status. Energy Build. 2014, 68, 72–78. [CrossRef]
Behzadian, M.; Kazemzadeh, R.B.; Albadvi, A.; Aghdasi, M. PROMETHEE: A Comprehensive Literature Review on Methodologies and Applications. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2010, 200, 198–215. [CrossRef]
De Radiguès, F.; De Vos, L.; Bosso, S. ASSET STUDY on Best Existing Positive Energy Blocks; European Commission: Luxembourg;
Brussels, Belgium, 2020; pp. 1–90.
Sibilla, M.; Manfren, M. Envisioning Building-as-Energy-Service in the European Context. From a Literature Review to a
Conceptual Framework. Archit. Eng. Des. Manag. 2021, 1–26. [CrossRef]
Cole, R.J. Net-Zero and Net-Positive Design: A Question of Value. Build. Res. Inf. 2015, 43, 1–6. [CrossRef]
Sibilla, M.; Kurul, E. Distributed Renewable and Interactive Energy Systems in Urban Environments. TECHNE J. Technol. Archit.
Environ. 2018, 1, 33–39.
Kolokotsa, D.; Rovas, D.; Kosmatopoulos, E.; Kalaitzakis, K. A Roadmap towards Intelligent Net Zero- and Positive-Energy
Buildings. Sol. Energy. 2011, 85, 3067–3084. [CrossRef]
Bossi, S.; Gollner, C.; Theierling, S. Towards 100 Positive Energy Districts in Europe: Preliminary Data Analysis of 61 European
Cases. Energies. 2020, 13, 6083. [CrossRef]
Alpagut, B.; Akyürek, Ö.; Mitre, E.M. Positive Energy Districts Methodology and Its Replication Potential. Proceedings 2019, 20, 8.
[CrossRef]
Sibilla, M.; Kurul, E. Assessing a Simplified Procedure to Reconcile Distributed Renewable and Interactive Energy Systems and
Urban Patterns. The Case Study of School Buildings in Rome. J. Urban Des. 2020, 25, 328–349. [CrossRef]
Sougkakis, V.; Lymperopoulos, K.; Nikolopoulos, N.; Margaritis, N.; Giourka, P.; Angelakoglou, K. An Investigation on the
Feasibility of Near-Zero and Positive Energy Communities in the Greek Context. Smart Cities 2020, 3, 362–384. [CrossRef]
Hyytinen, K.; Toivonen, M. Future Energy Services: Empowering Local Communities and Citizens. Foresight. 2015, 17, 349–364.
[CrossRef]
Rehman, H.U.; Reda, F.; Paiho, S.; Hasan, A. Towards Positive Energy Communities at High Latitudes. Energy Convers. Manag.
2019, 196, 175–195. [CrossRef]
Good, N.; Martínez Ceseña, E.A.; Mancarella, P. Ten Questions Concerning Smart Districts. Build. Environ. 2017, 118, 362–376.
[CrossRef]
Ala-Juusela, M.; Crosbie, T.; Hukkalainen, M. Defining and Operationalising the Concept of an Energy Positive Neighbourhood.
Energy Convers. Manag. 2016, 125, 133–140. [CrossRef]
Salimzadeh, N.; Vahdatikhaki, F.; Hammad, A. BIM-Based Surface-Specific Solar Simulation of Buildings. In Proceedings of the
ISARC 2018-35th International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in Construction and International AEC/FM Hackathon:
The Future of Building Things, Berlin, Germany, 20–25 July 2018.
Gupta, A.; Cemesova, A.; Hopfe, C.J.; Rezgui, Y.; Sweet, T. A Conceptual Framework to Support Solar PV Simulation Using an
Open-BIM Data Exchange Standard. Autom. Constr. 2014, 37, 166–181. [CrossRef]
Biljecki, F.; Ledoux, H.; Stoter, J.; Zhao, J. Formalisation of the Level of Detail in 3D City Modelling. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst.
2014, 48, 1–15. [CrossRef]
Cerezo, C.; Dogan, T.; Reinhart, C. Towards Standardized Building Properties Template Files for Early Design Energy Model
Generation. In Proceedings of the ASHRAE/IBPSA-USA Building Simulation Conference, Atlanta, GA, USA, 10–12 September
2014; p. 25.
Femenías, P.; Fudge, C. Retrofitting the City: Reuse of Non-Domestic Buildings. Proc. Inst. Civ. Eng. Urban Des. Plan. 2010, 163,
117–126. [CrossRef]
Trani, M.L.; Cassano, M.; Todaro, D.; Bossi, B. BIM Level of Detail for Construction Site Design. Proc. Procedia Eng. 2015, 123,
581–589. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2022, 14, 446

48.
49.
50.
51.
52.

53.
54.
55.
56.
57.

58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.

64.

20 of 20

Uusitalo, P.; Seppänen, O.; Lappalainen, E.; Peltokorpi, A.; Olivieri, H. Applying Level of Detail in a BIM-Based Project: An
Overall Process for Lean Design Management. Buildings 2019, 9, 109. [CrossRef]
Abanda, F.H.; Sibilla, M.; Garstecki, P.; Anteneh, B.M. A Literature Review on BIM for Cities Distributed Renewable and
Interactive Energy Systems. Int. J. Urban. Sustain. Dev. 2021, 13, 214–232. [CrossRef]
International Organisation for Standardisation. ISO 13790 Energy Performance of Buildings—Calculation of Energy Use for Space
Heating and Cooling; ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2008.
UNI/TS 11300-1:2014. Prestazioni Energetiche Degli Edifici–Parte 1: Determinazione Del Fabbisogno Di Energia Termica Dell’edificio per
La Climatizzazione Estiva Ed. Invernale; Comitato Termotecnico Italiano: Milano, Italy, 2014.
Dirutigliano, D.; Ballarini, I.; Murano, G.; Corrado, V. Reference Building Approach Combined with Dynamic Simulation in
Designing NZEBs. In Proceedings of the Building Simulation Conference Proceedings, San Francisco, CA, USA, 7–9 August 2017;
Volume 2.
Barton, M.; Schwan, L.; Hahn, J.; Anders, R.; Schweigler, C. Development of Reference Building Models Based on Statistical Data
for the Analysis of the Building Heat Demand. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2020, 588, 022051. [CrossRef]
Manfren, M.; Sibilla, M.; Tronchin, L. Energy Modelling and Analytics in the Built Environment—A Review of Their Role for
Energy Transitions in the Construction Sector. Energies 2021, 14, 679. [CrossRef]
EN 15316-4-6:2007. Heating Systems in Buildings-Method for Calculation of System Energy Requirements and System Efficiencies-Part.
4-6: Heat Generation Systems, Photovoltaic Systems; SIST: Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2007.
UNI/TS 11300-4:2016. Prestazioni Energetiche Degli Edifici Parte 4: Utilizzo Di Energie Rinnovabili e Di Altri Metodi Di Generazione per
La Climatizzazione Invernale e per La Produzione Di Acqua Calda Sanitaria; ANIT: Milano, Italy, 2016.
Murphy, G.B.; Kummert, M.; Anderson, B.R.; Counsell, J. A Comparison of the Uk Standard Assessment Procedure (Sap) and
Detailed Simulation of Building-Integrated Renewable Energy Systems. In Proceedings of the Building Simulation 2009, 11th
International Building Performance Simulation Association Conference, Glasgow, UK, 27–30 July 2009.
Lee, H.C.; Chang, C.T. Comparative Analysis of MCDM Methods for Ranking Renewable Energy Sources in Taiwan. Renew.
Sustain. Energy Rev. 2018, 92, 883–896. [CrossRef]
Barbhuiya, S.; Barbhuiya, S. Thermal Comfort and Energy Consumption in a UK Educational Building. Build. Environ. 2013, 68,
1–11. [CrossRef]
Kim, J.; Hong, T.; Jeong, J.; Koo, C.; Jeong, K. An Optimization Model for Selecting the Optimal Green Systems by Considering
the Thermal Comfort and Energy Consumption. Appl. Energy 2016, 169, 682–695. [CrossRef]
Park, J.H.; Yun, B.Y.; Chang, S.J.; Wi, S.; Jeon, J.; Kim, S. Impact of a Passive Retrofit Shading System on Educational Building to
Improve Thermal Comfort and Energy Consumption. Energy Build. 2020, 216, 109930. [CrossRef]
Remiddi, G. Trasformazioni per Migliorare l’architettura Scolastica. In L’architettura Delle Scuole Romane; Bonavita, A., Ed.;
Palombi Editori: Rome, Italy, 2005; pp. 27–29.
Ministero dell’Economia e delle Finanze. Decreto-Legge 4 Giugno 2013, n. 63. Disposizioni Urgenti per Il Recepimento Della Direttiva
2010/31/UE Del Parlamento Europeo e Del Consiglio Del 19 Maggio 2010, Sulla Prestazione Energetica Nell’edilizia; MEF: Rome, Italy,
2013.
Italian Ministry of Economic Development. Applicazione Delle Metodologie Di Calcolo Delle Prestazioni Energetiche e Definizione Delle
Prescrizioni e Dei Requisiti Minimi Degli Edifici; Italian Ministry of Economic Development: Rome, Italy, 2015.

