energies
Article

Positive Energy Districts and Energy Efficiency in Buildings:
An Innovative Technical Communication Sheet to Facilitate
Policy Officers’ Understanding to Enable Technologies
and Procedure
Tiziana Ferrante and Teresa Villani *
Department of Planning, Design, and Technology of Architecture, Sapienza University of Rome, 00196 Roma,
Italy; tiziana.ferrante@uniroma1.it
* Correspondence: teresa.villani@uniroma1.it



Citation: Ferrante, T.; Villani, T.
Positive Energy Districts and Energy
Efficiency in Buildings: An
Innovative Technical Communication
Sheet to Facilitate Policy Officers’
Understanding to Enable
Technologies and Procedure. Energies

Abstract: The Horizon 2020 framework programme is defining funding strategies for research and
innovation projects in European cities and promoting policies and solutions for the transition to a
competitive energy system at an urban scale. Given that Horizon Europe, thanks to the Driving
Urban Transition Partnership, will fund RD&I projects regarding transitions to urban sustainability;
how municipalities will implement different strategies is a relevant key to developing replicable
models. We conducted this study on Italian cities through a mapping exercise on selected case
studies. The aim was to provide a knowledge framework to municipalities undertaking sustainable
urban development actions. We selected case studies based on energy efficiency in buildings, both in
retrofits and new constructions. This highlighted how the adoption of multifaceted technological
solutions blended well with each other, and led, not only, to satisfy the initial requirements, in
terms of expected impacts from the single actions, but also provided relevant and replicable samples.
For this, the analysis of solutions tested by different municipalities in the selected projects led to
spreadsheets and indicators related to energy efficiency in buildings, which enabled a transition
to a PED, which could facilitate an understanding of elements that must be clearly indicated in a
preliminary design document (Directive 2014/24/UE).

2021, 14, 8551. https://doi.org/
10.3390/en14248551
Academic Editors: Paola Clerici

Keywords: positive energy district (PED); enabling solution for PED transition; energy efficiency in
buildings and real estate

Maestosi and Álvaro Gutiérrez
Received: 10 November 2021
Accepted: 10 December 2021
Published: 18 December 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

1. Introduction
1.1. Smart Cities and Positive Energy Districts: A European Commission Point of View
With the framework programme H2020, the European Commission, based on the Marseille and Toledo Declaration, council conclusions, opinions and the EU urban agenda [1–14],
is defining funding strategies for cities addressing actions and programmes for sustainable
urban development. Indeed, rapid population growth, deterioration of suburban areas
and social inequalities, together with the increase in citizens’ expectations of the quality
of life and supplied services, make sustainable development policies a relevant key for
energy saving and for the social participation of citizens. These topics have become the
main focus in urban areas through promoting the transition to a competitive energy system
based on several specific actions: reducing energy consumption and carbon footprints,
supplying low-cost and low-carbon power, employing alternative fuels and mobile energy
sources, employing a single and smart power network, researching new knowledge and
technologies, sound decision-making, public commitment and an energy and ICT innovation market with capacity absorption [15,16]. Therefore, the attention on sustainable
development drove, on one hand, to smart cities, and on the other, to PEDs (positive energy
districts) [17,18].

4.0/).

Energies 2021, 14, 8551. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14248551

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

2 of 18

Urban areas are indeed the main causes of climate change, and each action municipalities undertake for the future development of the city should contribute to characterize a
positive global change. For this, municipalities play a key role in planning and decisionmaking for sustainable urban development [16].
It is clear that it was thanks to the cited documents that the European Commission
developed an appropriate funding strategy to support sustainable development and sustainable urban areas. It is thanks to the contribution of a various set of stakeholders, such
as the EERA Strategic Energy and Technology Plan (SET Plan) [19], JRC [20], IEA [21],
JPI UE [22], the European Commission individuates, in the Horizon Europe framework
programme that funding for urban sustainable development, with the Driving Urban
Transition Partnership, has been directed towards positive energy districts, which represent
one of the three pathways to facilitate urban transition [23].
The SET Plan, adopted by the European Union in 2008, was a first step to establish an
energy technology policy for Europe; it was Europe’s technology response to the challenges
of meeting its targets on greenhouse gas emissions, renewable energy and energy efficiency.
The integrated SET Plan identified 10 actions for research and innovation. The actions
address the whole innovation chain, from research to market uptake, and tackled both
financing and regulatory frameworks. Among the actions was Action 3.2, which stated,
“Europe to become a global role model in integrated, innovative solutions for the planning,
deployment, and replication of positive energy districts” [17]. The implementation plan,
which was edited by smart cities and communities, focused on PEDs’ requirements, such as
an open innovation model for their planning, deployment and replication. In the TWG 3.2
implementation plan, cities were identified as the stakeholders who need to take a leading
role in the integrated and holistic planning of PEDs, aligning it with their long-term urban
strategies. Industries and organisations such as real estate development, construction
companies, network operators, utility companies and many others, will play a vital role as
solution providers.
Moreover, the Joint Programming Initiative Urban Europe—created in 2010 to address global urban challenges—thanks to the Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda
2.0 [24] and the White Paper “A Reference Framework for Positive Energy Districts and
Neighbourhoods” [22], contributed to the definition of a positive energy district.
Additionally, a working group in the framework of the Joint Programming Initiative
Urban Europe, analysed then collected the following in a booklet regarding PEDs [25]:
PED projects in 61 urban areas, which were described according to key indicators in
relation to PED projects (10 key indicators in the area of building/real estate) and to energy
sustainability PED projects (5 key indicators and related sub-key indicators in the area of
building/real estate). Subsequently, the above set of key indicators were extended in the
ENEA research project [26] (Figure 1).

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

3 of 18

Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW

4 of 18

Figure 1. Comparison of indicators and key indicators in the Booklet on PEDs and the ENEA
research project.

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

4 of 18

1.2. A National Perspective on PED
At a national level the concept of PEDs are almost unknown among municipality
public officers as there are no structured national events that discuss this topic, except
the ones promoted by the national Italian delegate in the JPI Urban Europe to support
alignment with the European dimension. Given that this was a national research activity
coordinated by ENEA [26], which analysed in depth what types of data were needed to
better explain the consistency of PED projects, based on these results we elaborated the
innovative technical communication sheets.
Our manuscript presents the innovative technical communication sheets (selected
examples from Milan, Florence and Trento), which were elaborated for 15 Italian case
studies located in the seven selected municipalities, and presents them in a booklet of
PEDs, they are also analysed by Bossi et al. [27]. While both cited documents refer to
the European dimension with a set of a few data types, our manuscript presents the innovative technical communication sheets, which include more detailed data concerning
technological solutions (project goals, expectations in terms of energy savings, energy class,
initial/final energy rating, etc., which are individuated in Figure 2) and implementation
processes (entity role in different phases, activities, instruments, etc., which are individuated in Figure 3), which refer to national experiences and facilitate national public officers’
understanding of positive energy districts.

Energies 2021, 14, 8551
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW

5 of 18
7 of 18

Figure 2. An example of a case-study project intervention sheet, the technological solutions.
Figure 2. An example of a case-study project intervention sheet, the technological solutions.

The contents of the technical communication sheet describing the public procurement process included the following:




General information such as the city’s name and the project’s name and details;
Building phases (programming, designing, execution);
Financial information.

For each phase we identified entities and roles (which were specific for each entity
and role during each phase), activities (in terms of procedures, rules, requirements, financing, etc., contents and technical specifications, instruments (the name/type of documents, plans, calls, etc., and the name/type of design documents), contracts and assignments) (Figure 3).

Energies 2021, 14, 8551
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW

6 of 18
8 of 18

Figure 3. An example of a case-study project intervention sheet and the implementation processes.
Figure 3. An example of a case-study project intervention sheet and the implementation processes.

1.3. Positive Energy District Functions
The
proposed
communication
The
guidance
on technical
PEDs includes
3 targets. sheet was undoubtedly an effective way to
present results and to compare building solutions and public procurement procedures.
1.
Efficiency: optimization of energy performance can reduce consumption in buildings
The frames were designed with the aim of facilitating the use of the content inforand mobility infrastructures, including the existing building stock.
mation by the principles of information visualization. This improved the cognitive pro2.
Flexibility: resilience of the regional energy system to carbon neutrality and 100%
cess for an understanding of the spreadsheet’s content through a balanced use of visual
renewable energy.
and textual codes, which were also used to achieve a different type of communication
3.
Production: empowerment of relevant gas-emissions reductions.
effectiveness, depending on the nature of the information (qualitative and quantitative)
and on the recipients.
Specifically, for frames of the implementation process of operations, a lot of the collected data in the spreadsheets concerned descriptive topics. These needed a textual

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

7 of 18

1.4. Paper Content
Given this, and based on results of ENEA national research [26], the researchers
verified that indicators used to describe PED experiences, at least at Italian level, were not
developed enough, especially those related to energy efficiency in buildings. The results
of the cited research highlights that we need more key indicators as well as new areas of
investigations (6 areas of investigations and more than 100 key indicators) to individuate
the innovative and integrated solutions in the planning/implementation phases, which
contribute to successfully activate the transition towards PEDs. Our research focused on
the area of energy efficiency in buildings/real estate, where the cited research individuated
35 new key indicators and 11 subindicators (Figure 1).
The novelty of our research activity relied on the creation of an innovative technical
communication sheet to facilitate policy officers’ understanding of enabling technologies
and procedures that improve building energy efficiency in positive-energy-district projects.
The manuscript presents the innovative technical communication sheets.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Materials
In our research we assumed, as a starting point, the following: (1) the contents of
the Booklet on PEDs was collected and edited by the PED Programme Management of
JPI Urban Europe and analysed 61 urban areas, 7 of them in Italy, namely Parma, Roma,
Milano, Bolzano, Firenze, Lecce and Trento, proposing a characterization through a set of
given elements; (2) results in the ENEA research implemented the original set in the Booklet
on PEDs according to a more comprehensive approach, which considered each building as
the result of a process characterized by phases, requirements and performance [28].
The starting point was to aggregate data that referred to a specific building, in order to
obtain authorization to build, in a single technical communication sheet, then to implement
the sheet with those characteristics to enable the building itself to be a physical node that
enabled a positive energy district.
Our activity focused on the elaboration of an innovative technical communication
sheet, which described, in an effective and easy way, key indicators related to buildings.
2.2. Methods
Research objectives: The research objectives aimed to individuate how to communicate
the key indicators related to energy efficiency in PED building projects to policy officers in
a municipality. These were based on the list of key indicators in the ENEA project, which
were used to perform a deeper analysis on the selected case studies (Figure 1).
Research methodology: The research methodology was based on a theoretical perspective that highlighted technology-enabling factors for energy efficiency in buildings as
nodes in a positive energy district, as well as rules, regulations and public procurement
procedures for rehabilitation, recovery or new buildings.
The methodology was based on three phases.
1.
2.
3.

Collection of objectives, aims and strategies in the PED building projects assumed as
case studies;
Analysis of case studies according to the new key indicators related to energy efficiency in buildings/real estate;
Creation of technical communication sheets for easier understanding.

The paper presents the results of the research activities. This work focussed on identifying a technical communication sheet to facilitate the comprehension of key indicators that
concern energy efficiency in buildings/real estate and the public procurement procedure.
This work also aimed to facilitate the comprehension and understanding by civil servants
in municipalities, which aimed to activate the transition to positive energy districts.
According to each case study, and to the above-mentioned key indicators, it was
necessary to present analysis results on energy-efficiency solutions in buildings as well

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

8 of 18

as on public procurement procedures in each case study. This helped facilitate the comparison and identification of enabling factors for the transition to a PED, as related to the
specific topic.
Thus, two types of technical communication sheets were created.
To define the spreadsheet structure, the study considered the data collected in the
7 Italian municipalities, which were already selected as “in transition to a PED” in the
Booklet on PEDs [25], and 15 energy-efficiency interventions on buildings (7 already
indicated in the Booklet of PEDs and 8 new ones), which were identified as case studies
specifically referring to energy efficiency in buildings/real estate projects.
Then according to the type of indicators, we developed one technical communication
sheet describing energy-efficiency solutions in building/real estate case studies and a
second one describing the public procurement process.
The contents of the technical communication sheet describing energy-efficiency solutions in the buildings and real estate case studies included the following:

•
•
•
•
•

General information such as the city’s name and the project’s name and details;
Quantitative and qualitative data, such as type of financing, financing amount, EU
co-funding (% indicators);
Data on energy class upgrades, such as initial energy rating and final energy rating
(energy class from A to G);
Information on expected impacts, such as expectations in terms of energy efficiency,
savings, consumption reduction, etc. (% indicators);
Data on adopted technology solutions in response to project objectives (project goals in
terms of energy efficiency, optimization and consumption reduction and their impact
when achieved) (Figure 2).

The contents of the technical communication sheet describing the public procurement
process included the following:

•
•
•

General information such as the city’s name and the project’s name and details;
Building phases (programming, designing, execution);
Financial information.

For each phase we identified entities and roles (which were specific for each entity and
role during each phase), activities (in terms of procedures, rules, requirements, financing,
etc., contents and technical specifications, instruments (the name/type of documents, plans,
calls, etc., and the name/type of design documents), contracts and assignments) (Figure 3).
The proposed technical communication sheet was undoubtedly an effective way to
present results and to compare building solutions and public procurement procedures.
The frames were designed with the aim of facilitating the use of the content information by the principles of information visualization. This improved the cognitive process
for an understanding of the spreadsheet’s content through a balanced use of visual and
textual codes, which were also used to achieve a different type of communication effectiveness, depending on the nature of the information (qualitative and quantitative) and on
the recipients.
Specifically, for frames of the implementation process of operations, a lot of the
collected data in the spreadsheets concerned descriptive topics. These needed a textual
language for communication, but, at the same time, must communicate an organized
sequence of phases concerning operators and proper tools for their specific activities.
In this case, to represent the complexity of the building process and the public procurement (with its relevant dataset) of the analysed case studies, we chose a representation
that integrated text-based information organized within flow diagrams that facilitated a
logical sequence with links among areas.
The aim of the proposed graphic organisation was to disseminate this information to
municipal officials/civil servants (competent departments and offices) who wanted to start
an urban development plan for driving ecological transitions and PEDs. By learning from
this information, which also displayed a more immediate visual representation, officials

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

9 of 18

could take out useful instruments for the selection of policy and decision making on
funding strategies, appropriate procurement processes and key documents to ensure the
quality of the operations, in terms of energy efficiency and sustainability, and to identify
any issues (diagram bugs) and anticipate solutions.
In this way the exploratory analysis of the data benefitted from the visual representation through fast information communication that otherwise hid within the spreadsheets.
This positively affected the target in replicating the case studies’ procedures. Visual attributes, such as colour, size, proximity and visual representation of quantitative data, as
well as textual content, were used for the frames on technological solutions, to convey
complex data that would otherwise require huge cognitive processing. We collected the set
of data through the desk activity on innovative solutions for the energy efficiency of the
case studies and on expected impacts. We then reorganized them into a consistent form
that was able to communicate the target context, taking well into account the key recipients
as municipal technical office chiefs, architects, etc.
3. Results
The method for the frame implementation was to report a first phase of all information
taken from a critical reading of the analysed projects and to gradually remove redundant
information, or information liable to further technical insight. This way allowed us to bring
out only first-level data, which were useful to identify, with an immediate representation,
the impact of the positive solution within the PEDs. (Figure 4). In addition, this helped
technicians consider the content’s consistence for their replicability.
We carried out work on the spreadsheet affordance, i.e., those real or perceived
properties which were self explanatory, thus simply showing them to informed recipients
supported its multiple uses in terms of data interaction.
The use of visual representation for quantitative context data made it easier to use the
preconditions for starting energy-efficiency operations based on the need for funding. In
particular it showed the impacts of EU grants.
The different levels of colour saturation and intensity facilitated the process of visual
recognition for most relevant data.
The choice of the use of icons made effective mental representations, facilitated fast
communication and, in any case, kept a close link between visual and textual terminology.
This information, together with the experience of recipients, should be able to produce knowledge on the project objectives, on the specificities of adopted solutions and
on the key components of the building system for energy efficiency. Knowledge was
therefore the main objective of the communication process. This empowered technicians to
express a meaningful consideration on data and to develop the technical knowledge for
the replication of the solutions.
In order to assess the on-field effectiveness of the frames we were holding, we had
many online meetings with specific stakeholders of the involved municipalities, from
which we received useful feedback on how to improve the communicativeness of the
frames; by implementing content and graphics, for example.
Indeed, these frames were also prototypes on which to test the accessibility of information content and its actual use by checking compliance with replicable solutions. The
obtained feedback, and the application of information visualization principles, were also
crucial for the ongoing design of the digital database.
Moreover, the communication outline of the frames was particularly effective for a
comparative assessment between the procedures of the operations in more cities and the
technological solutions for energy-efficiency operations in the case studies.
Indeed, the objective comparison between homogeneous datasets was visually facilitated by reducing the error during data comparison, which were carried out on spreadsheets.

Energies 2021,
2021, 14,
14, 8551
x FOR PEER REVIEW
Energies

10
18
10 of
of 18

Figure 4. Comparison of a technical data sheet and a technical communication sheet.
Figure 4. Comparison of a technical data sheet and a technical communication sheet.

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

Moreover, the communication outline of the frames was particularly effective for a
comparative assessment between the procedures of the operations in more cities and the
technological solutions for energy-efficiency operations in the case studies.
Indeed, the objective comparison between homogeneous datasets was visually facilitated by reducing the error during data comparison, which were carried
11 ofout
18 on
spreadsheets.
For the frame of technological solutions, the selected communication outline could
the‘‘weight’’
frame of technological
solutions,
the selected
outline compared
could
highlightForthe
of the results
achieved
by thecommunication
different solutions,
highlight the “weight” of the results achieved by the different solutions, compared within
within
each indicator, related to the expected impacts. Such impacts needed a close link,
each indicator, related to the expected impacts. Such impacts needed a close link, not only
not only to adopt solutions, but also for the building system components that were into adopt solutions, but also for the building system components that were involved in the
volved
in theenergy-efficiency
surveyed energy-efficiency
operations
(Figure 5).
surveyed
operations (Figure
5).

Figure 5. Milan and Florence case study: comparative analysis of technological solutions.

For the frame of the execution process through to the comparison of flow diagrams, we
could focus on the critical phases of the building process and on the potential for different
instruments the municipalities chose for each activity, as well as the extensive impact on
the quality and achievement of the PED target (Figure 6).

Figure 5. Milan and Florence case study: comparative analysis of technological solutions.

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

For the frame of the execution process through to the comparison of flow diagrams,
we could focus on the critical phases of the building process and on the potential for
12 extensive
of 18
different instruments the municipalities chose for each activity, as well as the
impact on the quality and achievement of the PED target (Figure 6).

Figure 6. Milan and Florence case study: comparative analysis of the implementation processes.

Figure 6. Milan and Florence case study: comparative analysis of the implementation processes.
3.1. Technical Communication Sheets on Technological Solution

Systematization
of the information
collected in the
spreadsheets allowed a univocal
3.1. Technical
Communication
Sheets on Technological
Solution

interpretation of the different analysed projects, in terms of the innovative technological
Systematization
of the information
collected
in thedevelopment,
spreadsheetsimplementation
allowed a univocal
solutions
and the processes
that empowered
planning,
interpretation
of theofdifferent
projects,
in terms
of analysis
the innovative
technological
and management
different analysed
actions. The
importance
of the
of technological
solutions
the processes
that
empowered
planning,
implementation
solutionsand
concerned
the topic of
energy
efficiency: the
design ofdevelopment,
such actions was
the result
of management
strategic policiesofand
the use of
specificThe
solutions
to achieve
objectives.
Such
and
different
actions.
importance
ofestablished
the analysis
of technological
solutionsconcerned
took place the
to achieve
a sustainable
architecture
on aoflow
environmental
solutions
topic of
energy efficiency:
thebased
design
such
actions was the
impact
of
the
building
through
resource
saving
and
pollution
reduction
in
all
lifecycleobjecresult of strategic policies and the use of specific solutions to achieve established
phases. There was also a positive approach to “on-site” energy production using specific
tives. Such solutions took place to achieve a sustainable architecture based on a low ensystems that used renewable sources. Within the study carried out in this first phase,
vironmental
impact of the building through resource saving and pollution reduction in
we found that projects stood out for the adoption of different solutions that were able to
allimprove
lifecycleenergy
phases.
There wasfor
also
a we
positive
approach
to ‘‘on-site’’
production
performance;
this,
identified
an in-depth
study onenergy
how adopted
using
specific systems
that usedwith
renewable
sources.
Within
theWe
study
carried
out in this
technological
choices interacted
the whole
building
system.
reported
the sheet
first
phase,
we
found
that
projects
stood
out
for
the
adoption
of
different
solutions
that
sample of the case study of the city of Trento (Figure 7).

were able to improve energy performance; for this, we identified an in-depth study on
how adopted technological choices interacted with the whole building system. We reported the sheet sample of the case study of the city of Trento (Figure 7).

Energies 2021, 14, 8551
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW

13 of 18
13 of 18

Figure7.7. Trento
Trentocase
casestudy
studyproject
projectintervention:
intervention:the
thetechnological
technologicalsolutions.
solutions.
Figure

We conducted
conducted the
the project’s
project’s survey
survey and
and linked
linked itit closely
closely with
with the
the analysis
analysis of
of each
each
We
buildingprocess.
process.
building

3.2.
3.2. Technical
TechnicalCommunication
CommunicationSheets
Sheetson
onImplementation
ImplementationProcesses
Processes
In
In this
this section
sectionwe
wediscuss
discussthe
thespreadsheet
spreadsheeton
onimplementation
implementationprocesses
processesconcerning
concerning
building
buildingrehabilitation.
rehabilitation. In
In reference
referenceto
tothe
theprocedures
procedureswe
weoutlined,
outlined,with
withthe
theinvolvement
involvement
of
wewe
identified
specific
actions
that that
citiescities
developed.
The
ofmunicipalities
municipalitiesand
andstakeholders,
stakeholders,
identified
specific
actions
developed.
project
variety
depended
on
factors
including
the
programming
methods
of
actions,
the
The project variety depended on factors including the programming methods of actions,
financing
policies
and
the
stakeholders’
involvement
through
participatory
processes.
the financing policies and the stakeholders’ involvement through participatory processes.

Energies 2021, 14, 8551
Energies 2021, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW

14 of 18
14 of 18

We reported an example of the described sheet in the case study of the city of Trento
We reported an example of the described sheet in the case study of the city of Trento
(Figure 8).
(Figure 8).

Figure 8. Trento case study project intervention: the implementation processes.
Figure 8. Trento case study project intervention: the implementation processes.

3.3.
3.3.New
NewSet
SetofofIndicators
IndicatorsComparing
Comparingthe
theRequirement
Requirementininthe
thePreliminary
PreliminaryDesign
DesignDocument
Documentwith
with
the
theTechnological
TechnologicalSolutions
SolutionsAdopted
Adopted
The
Theresult
resultobtained
obtainedfor
foreach
eachproject,
project,from
fromthese
thesetwo
twosheets,
sheets,was
wasnot
notonly
onlyuseful
usefulfor
for
specific
content
but
especially
for
the
link
we
could
detect
between
the
two
observation
specific content but especially for the link we could detect between the two observation
areas.
areas.Taking
TakingTrento,
Trento,again,
again,asasan
anexample
examplecase
casestudy,
study,the
theanalysis
analysisofofthe
theimplementation
implementation
processes
led
us
to
highlight
the
relevance
of
the
documents
used
since
processes led us to highlight the relevance of the documents used sincethe
theprogramming
programming
phase.
phase. Indeed,
Indeed, the
thequality
qualityof
ofthe
thepre-design
pre-designdocument,
document,which
whichwe
wefound
foundcomplete
completeand
and

Energies 2021,
2021, 14,
14, x8551
Energies
FOR PEER REVIEW

18
1515ofof 18

clear
compliance to
to specific
specificrequirements
requirementsofofenergy
energysustainability,
sustainability,
highlights
sevclear in
in the
the compliance
highlights
several
eral
indicators,
which
proved
valuable
duringthe
thepreparatory
preparatoryphase
phase prior
prior to
to design
indicators,
which
proved
to to
bebe
valuable
during
design
(Figure
limit
thethe
building
scale,
butbut
detected
all factors
of the
(Figure 9);
9);these
theseindicators
indicatorsdid
didnot
not
limit
building
scale,
detected
all factors
of
action.
the action.

Figure9.
9.Indicators
Indicatorsdescribed
describedin
inthe
thepreliminary
preliminary design
design document
document for
for the
the Trento
Trento case
case study.
study.
Figure

The design
design phase,
phase, which
procedure,
was
tendered
for
The
whichfollowed
followedthe
thepublic
publicprocurement
procurement
procedure,
was
tendered
by
the
design
contract,
in
accordance
with
the
DPP
requirements.
This
produced
an
easier
for by the design contract, in accordance with the DPP requirements. This produced an
selection
criteriacriteria
procedure
for the bid
and bid
for the
of especially
energy-efficient
easier
selection
procedure
for the
andselection
for the selection
of especially
enertechnological
solutions.
Strategic
policies
were
also
a
driver
to
meet
the
requirements
as
gy-efficient technological solutions. Strategic policies were also a driver to meet the re-

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

16 of 18

reported among expected impacts in terms of energy. Thus, the overall process quality that
included sustainability topics from the early stages of promotion and programming to all
implementation tools, should clearly result in success of the action with a sensible design
of the technological solutions in compliance with the PED criteria.
4. Discussion
Although our research activity will support further in-depth investigation, the proposed frame that describes PED projects, appears promising for the organization of information and has a clear focus on strategies and solutions, which will facilitate public officers
in understanding the main characteristics of PED projects.
Several discussions are ongoing among most prominent European networks (EERA
JPSC PED modules, SET Plan Action 3.2 PED Programme/DUT PED pillar, COST Action PED-EU-NET, IEA EBC Annex 83, UERA PED WG, PED-related SCC01 projects,
H2020 SCC01 TG Replication, SCALE, Smart Cities Marketplace) to define a common and
shared definition of a PED, as well as to individuate key indicators that capture the true
PED essence.
No matter what the key indicators will be, our research activity highlighted the
importance of effective communication.
With increasing numbers of city authorities embracing the PED concept, and an
increasing number of PED-related projects, there is a lack in communication characteristics,
results, aims and goals in PED projects, in knowing that clear and effective communication
facilitates comparison, evaluation and replication.
Our research activity was aligned with these contents and our aim was to fulfil the
existing gap by contributing, with our results, methods of organizing information to
facilitate understanding of PED projects.
5. Conclusions
Although our research will further develop an in-depth analysis of other aspects
of cities from our case studies (e.g., identification and qualification of urban ecosystem
stakeholders and sectors of competence with their involvements at national, regional,
provincial and local levels), the results presented in this paper seem interesting and in line
with ongoing European debate.
There is a need for effective communication on PED case studies that highlight information related to strategies and solutions implemented by the municipalities to facilitate
the transition to PEDs, in the specific field of energy efficiency in the building/real estate sectors.
Effective communication on findings related to PED pathways will encourage and
facilitate synergies among urban ecosystem stakeholders by activating virtuous communication processes and improving the understanding of actions to support PED transition.
Indeed, the new set of indicators identified by the ENEA optimizes the understanding
of the technicalities of PED projects, thanks to a national research project we carried out to
identify an effective way to communicate results and findings in an appropriate way to
public officers.
Among technicalities, the most prominent was within the building process (planning
of sustainable actions, design development, implementation and management), which
represented the fundamental activity public officers take to move from ideas to reality.
That is why our main aim was to communicate the effectiveness of solutions and
procedures that could be assumed as a set of replicable good practices among public officers
involved in technical offices or sectors within municipalities: from several tender, technical and administrative documents, as well as financing budgets required for activating
public tenders.
Finally, a particular attention was paid to the planning phase of the building process
and to the contents of the preliminary design document where public officers within
municipalities expressed requirements and addressed the choices in a meaningful way.

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

17 of 18

Indeed, a clear and effective qualification of the demand arose from the necessary conditions
for the implementation of technological and financial solutions. In fact, the key role of
public officers of municipalities was clear from the coherence and specificity of the technical
planning documents.
Without their involvement and support there was no chance in the area of positive
energy districts, due to the complexity of the involved areas of expertise in road mapping
urban transition strategies.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.F. and T.V.; methodology, T.F.; validation, T.F. and T.V.;
formal analysis, T.V.; investigation, T.F. and T.V.; resources, T.F. and T.V.; data curation, T.V.; writing—
original draft preparation, T.F. and T.V.; supervision, T.F.; project administration, T.F. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: Project funded by Ricerca di Sistema, Report RdS/PTR (2020)/040.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank the public officials of the municipalities included in the
Booklet on PEDs and the Architect Eleonora Di Manno, who participated in data collection, analysis
and report.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.

2.
3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

‘Marseille Declaration’ Adopted at the Informal Ministerial Meeting of Ministers Responsible for Urban Development on
25 November 2008. Available online: http://www.eib.org/attachments/jessica_marseille_statement_en.pdf (accessed on 9
December 2021).
Toledo Declaration, Adopted at the Informal Ministerial Meeting of Ministers on Urban Development of 22 June Adopted 2010 in
Toledo. Available online: http://www.ccre.org/docs/2010_06_04_toledo_declaration_final.pdf (accessed on 9 December 2021).
Territorial Agenda of the EU 2020, Agreed at the Informal Ministerial Meeting of Ministers responsible for Spatial Planning and
Territorial Development of 19 May 2011 in Gödöllő. Available online: http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/en/information/
publications/communications/2011/territorial-agenda-of-the-european-union-2020 (accessed on 9 December 2021).
Urban Agenda for the EU—‘Pact of Amsterdam’, Agreed at the Informal Meeting of EU Ministers Responsible for Urban
Matters on 30 May 2016 in Amsterdam. Available online: http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/policy/themes/urbandevelopment/agenda/pact-of-amsterdam.pdf (accessed on 9 December 2021).
The General Affair Council of the European Union—Council Conclusions on the Urban Agenda for the EU, 24 June 2016, the
Council of the European Union. Available online: http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2016/06/24
/conclusions-eu-urban-agenda/ (accessed on 9 December 2021).
Council Conclusions on the Objectives and Priorities of the EU and Its Member States, Adopted for the Third United Nations
Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), 2016. Available online: http://www.consilium.europa.
eu/en/press/press-releases/2016/05/12/conclusions-on-habitat-iii/ (accessed on 9 December 2021).
Report from the Commission to the Council on the Urban Agenda for the EU, COM (2017) 657 final. 2017. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/policy/themes/urban/report_urban_agenda2017_en.pdf (accessed on 9
December 2021).
Opinion of the Committee of the Regions ‘Towards an Integrated Urban Agenda for the EU’, Adopted on 25 and 26 June 2014.
Available online: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52013IR6902&from=PL (accessed on 9
December 2021).
Opinion of the Committee of the Regions ‘Concrete Steps for Implementing the EU Urban Agenda’, Adopted on 7 April
2016. Available online: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52015IR5511 (accessed on 9 December 2021).
Committee of the Regions—Commission for Territorial Cohesion Policy and the EU Budget ‘The Follow-Up Strategy on the
Implementation of the Urban Agenda for the EU’. 2016. Available online: http://memportal.cor.europa.eu/Handlers/ViewDoc.
ashx?doc=COR-2016-04284-00-01-TCD-TRA-EN.docx (accessed on 9 December 2021).

Energies 2021, 14, 8551

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

24.
25.
26.

27.
28.

18 of 18

European Economic and Social Committee Opinion: The 2030 Agenda—A European Union Committed to Sustainable
Development Globally, Adopted on 20 October 2016. Available online: http://www.eesc.europa.eu/en/our-work/opinionsinformation-reports/opinions/2030-agenda-european-union-committed-support-sustainable-development-goals-globallyown-initiative-opinion (accessed on 9 December 2021).
Resolution of the European Parliament of 3 July 2018 on the Role of Cities in the Institutional Framework of the Union
(2017/2037(INI)). Available online: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52018IP0273&rid=2
(accessed on 9 December 2021).
Report of the Parliamentary Committee on Regional Development on the Urban Dimension of EU policies (2014/2213(INI)),
Adopted on 17 June 2015. Available online: https://www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/A-8-2015-0218_EN.html
(accessed on 9 December 2021).
Opinion of the European Committee of the Regions—‘Implementation Assessment of the Urban Agenda for the EU’, Adopted on
5 July 2018. Available online: http://memportal.cor.europa.eu/Handlers/ViewDoc.ashx?pdf=true&doc=COR-2017-06120-00-00
-AC-TRA-EN.docx (accessed on 9 December 2021).
Østergaard, P.A.; Maestosi, P.C. Tools, technologies and systems integration for the Smart and Sustainable Cities to come. Int. J.
Sustain. Energy Plan. Manag. 2019, 24, 1–6. [CrossRef]
European Union. Regional Policy. City of Tomorrow. Challenges, Visions, Ways Forward. 2011. Available online: https:
//ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docgener/studies/pdf/citiesoftomorrow/citiesoftomorrow_final.pdf (accessed on 2
November 2021).
SET-Plan Action 3.2 on Smart Cities and Communities. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/wp-content/uploads/2018
/09/setplan_smartcities_implementationplan.pdf (accessed on 2 November 2021).
Joss, S.; de Jong, M.; Schraven, D.; Zhan, P. Sustainable–Smart–Resilient–Low Carbon–Eco–Knowledge cities; making sense of a
multitude of concepts promoting sustainable urbanization. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, 109, 25–38. [CrossRef]
The EU SET-Plan. EERA. Available online: https://www.eera-set.eu/eera-in-the-eu/set-plan.html (accessed on 2 November 2021).
Shnapp, S.; Paci, D.; Bertoldi, P. Enabling Positive Energy Districts Across Europe: Energy Efficiency Couples Renewable Energy, EUR
30325 EN; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2020. [CrossRef]
IEA EBC—Annex 81—Data-Driven Smart Buildings. Available online: https://annex81.iea-ebc.org/ (accessed on 2 November 2021).
Hinterberger, R.; Gollner, C.; Noll, M.; Meyer, S.; Schwarz, H.-G. White Paper on PED Reference Framework for Positive Energy
Districts and Neighbourhoods, JPI Urban Europe and SET-Plan 3.2 Programme on Positive Energy Districts. 2020. Available
online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/White-Paper-PED-Framework-Definition-2020323-final.pdf
(accessed on 2 November 2021).
Proposal for the European Partnership Driving Urban Transitions. 2020. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/
default/files/research_and_innovation/funding/documents/ec_rtd_he-partnerships-driving-urban-transitions.pdf (accessed
on 2 November 2021).
Joint Programming Initiative Urban Europe. Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda 2.0. 2019. Available online: https:
//jpi-urbaneurope.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/SRIA2.0.pdf (accessed on 2 November 2021).
Joint Programming Initiative Urban Europe. Europe Towards Positive Energy Districts. 2020. Available online: https://jpiurbaneurope.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/PED-Booklet-Update-Feb-2020_2.pdf (accessed on 2 November 2021).
Ferrante, T.; Villani, T. Il Ruolo delle Municipalità nei Progetti di Ricerca, Sviluppo e Innovazione: Transizione Verso
Aree Urbane Sostenibili, ENEA, Ricerca di Sistema Elettrico, Report RdS/PTR (2020)/040. 2020. Available online:
https://www.enea.it/it/Ricerca_sviluppo/lenergia/ricerca-di-sistema-elettrico/accordo-di-programma-MiSE-ENEA-20
19-2021/tecnologie/tecnologie-per-la-penetrazione-efficiente-del-vettore-elettrico-negli-usi-finali/local-energy-district
(accessed on 2 November 2021).
Bossi, S.; Gollner, C.; Theierling, S. Towards 100 Positive Energy Districts in Europe: Preliminary Data Analysis of 61 European
Cases. Energies 2020, 13, 6083. [CrossRef]
Koskela, L.; Huovila, P.; Leinonen, J. Design management in building construction: From theory to practice. J. Constr. Res. 2020, 3,
1–16. [CrossRef]

