sustainability
Article

Positive Energy Districts: Identifying Challenges
and Interdependencies
Savis Gohari Krangsås 1, * , Koen Steemers 2 , Thaleia Konstantinou 3 , Silvia Soutullo 4 , Mingming Liu 5 ,
Emanuela Giancola 4 , Bahri Prebreza 6 , Touraj Ashrafian 7 , Lina Murauskaitė 8 and Nienke Maas 9
1

2
3

4

5
6

7

8

9




*

Department of Architecture and Planning, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU),
7491 Trondheim, Norway
Department of Architecture, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PX, UK; kas11@cam.ac.uk
Faculty of Architecture, Delft University of Technology (TU Delft), 2628 BL Delft, The Netherlands;
t.konstantinou@tudelft.nl
Department of Energy, Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas, Medioambientales y Tecnológicas (CIEMAT),
28040 Madrid, Spain; silvia.soutullo@ciemat.es (S.S.); emanuela.giancola@ciemat.es (E.G.)
School of Electronic Engineering, Dublin City University, 9 Dublin, Ireland; mingming.liu@dcu.ie
Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pristina, 10000 Pristina, Kosovo;
bahri.prebreza@uni-pr.edu
Faculty of Architecture and Design, Özyeğin University, Istanbul 34794, Turkey;
touraj.ashrafian@ozyegin.edu.tr
Laboratory of Energy Systems Research, Lithuanian Energy Institute, LT-44403 Kaunus, Lithuania;
Lina.Murauskaite@lei.lt
Department of Strategy and Policy, The Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientific Research (TNO),
2595 AD The Hague, The Netherlands; nienke.maas@tno.nl
Correspondence: savis.gohari@ntnu.no

Citation: Krangsås, S.G.; Steemers,
K.; Konstantinou, T.; Soutullo, S.; Liu,
M.; Giancola, E.; Prebreza, B.;
Ashrafian, T.; Murauskaitė, L.; Maas,
N. Positive Energy Districts:
Identifying Challenges and
Interdependencies. Sustainability 2021,
13, 10551. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su131910551
Academic Editor: Tan Yigitcanlar
Received: 16 August 2021
Accepted: 17 September 2021
Published: 23 September 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

Abstract: Positive Energy Districts (PED) are areas within cities that generate more renewable
energy than they consume, contributing to cities’ energy system transformation toward carbon
neutrality. Since PED is a novel concept, the implementation is very challenging. Within the European
Cooperation in Science and Technology (COST) Action, which offers an open space for collaboration
among scientists across Europe (and beyond), this paper asks what the needs for supporting the
implementation of PEDs are. To answer this, it draws on Delphi process (expert reviews) as the
main method alongside the literature review and also uses surveys as supplementary methods to
identify the main challenges for developing PEDs. Initial findings reveal seven interacting topics that
later were ranked as highest to the lowest as the following: governance, incentive, social, process,
market, technology and context. These are interrelated and interdependent, implying that none
can be considered in isolation of the others and cannot be left out in order to ensure the successful
development of PEDs. The resources that are needed to address these challenges are a common need
for systematic understanding of the processes behind them, as well as cross-disciplinary models and
protocols to manage the complexity of developing PEDs. The results can be the basis for devising the
conceptual framework on the development of new PED guides and tools.

with regard to jurisdictional claims in
iations.

Keywords: Positive Energy District; challenges; COST Action; governance; needs; tools; market;
participation; collaboration

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.

1. Introduction

published maps and institutional affil-

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

Europe aims to be a global role model in energy transition and reducing its carbon
footprint, thereby moving towards sustainable development. Since cities are the main
centers of greenhouse gas production, using 65–70% of global energy and producing
70–75% of global emissions, European cities are urged to control and reduce emissions from
their buildings and districts [1] In this regard, the European Union introduced the program
“Positive Energy Districts (PEDs) for Sustainable Urban Development” to initiate and

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551. https://doi.org/10.3390/su131910551

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

2 of 20

support the planning, deployment and replication of 100 positive energy neighborhoods by
2025 [2]. These districts are a key part of creating a comprehensive approach to sustainable
urbanization and dealing with technological, spatial, regulatory, financial, legal, social and
economic perspectives [3,4].
Due to the novelty and multifaceted nature of this urban concept [5], there are multiple
interpretations and definitions that make it challenging to implement, evaluate, compare,
or replicate these districts. Saheb et al. [6] analyzed four zero energy community projects to
identify a global framework that these communities could implement. Brozovsky et al. [7]
reviewed the latest articles published on climate-friendly neighborhoods to contextualize
this concept and identify the main targets, needs and gaps. Hearn et al. [8] proposed a
framework that integrated energy justice and quality of life in implementing a PED to
guarantee global well-being to all the residents. These districts aim to develop livable and
innovative spaces that facilitate the energy transition towards decarbonization and meet
climate, social and economic objectives.
In the framework of the SET Plan Action 3.2, JPI Urban Europe and the EERA Joint
Program on Smart Cities, PEDs are defined as:
“Energy-efficient and energy-flexible urban areas or groups of connected buildings
which produce net zero greenhouse gas emissions and actively manage an annual local
or regional surplus production of renewable energy. They require integration of different
systems and infrastructures and interaction between buildings, the users and the regional
energy, mobility and ICT systems while securing the energy supply and a good life for all
in line with social, economic and environmental sustainability.”
Participating PED program partners have agreed that this PED reference framework
offers a common baseline across all countries while ensuring flexibility regarding local
conditions for PEDs at the same time. In this regard, the concept of PEDs is evolving and
still needs to be refined, advanced and redeveloped to be demonstrated, implemented and
replicated [9].
Implementation of the PEDs requires a deep understanding and consideration of cities’
contextual conditions, policies, priorities, strategies, resources and solutions. Knowledge,
skills and technologies are needed for planning, designing, implementation and monitoring, as well as replication and mainstreaming of PEDs. Even though many European
cities are leading transitions to low-carbon energy, there is no joint definition, roadmap and
guidelines to ensure the actual feasibility of PED designs, mainly because cities are in planning or early implementation stages [2]. In this regard, there is still a need for identification
of main requirements for implementing PEDs and understanding the interconnection and
synergies between these requirements. The COST Action “CA19126—Positive Energy Districts European Network” (PED-EU-NET) (https://pedeu.net/, accessed on 16 September
2021) started in November 2020) contributes to this as well as the deployment of PEDs in
Europe by facilitating knowledge, experience exchange and collaboration in research and
innovations among cities, industry and research organizations.
This CA acknowledges that the main challenge to propel Europe towards its goal
is to open up the innovation process to all active players so that knowledge can flow
freely across the entire economic and social environment [10]. The deployment of PEDs
requires innovations in multiple domains encompassing interconnected technological,
social, cultural, political, spatial, financial and regulatory aspects. Each domain has its
own set of embedded challenges that need to be tackled in order to foster the innovation
process.
There are both technical and non-technical challenges to creating an overarching
vision and framework for PEDs. On the one hand, the aim is to define generalizable tools,
guidelines and targets. On the other hand, it is necessary to respond to local stakeholders,
approaches and conditions. Based on Europe-wide consultation with city representatives,
urban stakeholders and national experts, the PED reference framework has categorized the
challenges in terms of technological, spatial, regulatory, financial, legal, ecological, social
and economic perspectives [11]. Although no ranking was implied, it was understandable

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

social and economic perspectives [11]. Although no ranking was implied, it was
understandable that the technical challenges were mentioned first given the energy and
3 of 20
emissions targets outlined previously. The survey of case study PEDs provides a ranking
of the success factors and challenges according to those involved in implementing the
projects [2]. Based on this information, the issues that were considered the most important,
across
the success
factors and
challenges,
can
be ranked
as follows
(Figure 1):
that both
the technical
challenges
werethe
mentioned
first
given
the energy
and emissions
targets
(1)outlined
Governance
(politics,
policy,
regulations
and city
administration);
previously.
The
survey
of case study
PEDs
provides a ranking of the success
(2)factors
Social
(stakeholder
citizentoengagement);
and
challenges and
according
those involved in implementing the projects [2]. Based
(3)onMarket
(funding, markets
and
business
models); and
this information,
the issues
that
were considered
the most important, across both the
(4)success
Technical
(energy
and
urban integration).
factors
and the
challenges,
can be ranked as follows (Figure 1):
shown in Figure
1, the
governance
andand
social
ranked highest and were
(1)As Governance
(politics,
policy,
regulations
cityfactors
administration);
(2) close
Social
(stakeholder
anda citizen
engagement);
very
to each
other, with
noticeable
gap before the market and technology factors.
(3)purpose
Market
(funding,
andthese
business
models);
and systematically, with more
The
of this
papermarkets
is to define
and other
challenges
(4) Technical
and urban
integration).
descriptive
detail (energy
and to identify
interdependencies
between them.

Figure 1. Votes for perceived success factors and challenges of PEDs, equally weighted and combined
Figure
1. Votes
for perceived
success factors
and challenges
of PEDs,
equally weighted
into the
top four
principal categories,
to reveal
their ranking
of importance
(after [2]).and
combined into the top four principal categories, to reveal their ranking of importance (after [2]).

As shown in Figure 1, the governance and social factors ranked highest and were very
Onetoofeach
the other,
objectives
the CA is to
generate
intoand
thetechnology
development
of new
close
withof
a noticeable
gap
before insights
the market
factors.
The
guides
andoftools
optimizing
the these
design,
financing
and opportunities
of
purpose
this for
paper
is to define
andoperation,
other challenges
systematically,
with more
PEDs.
This paper
is aligned
with this
objective, and aims
to firstthem.
define exiting challenges
descriptive
detail
and to identify
interdependencies
between
systematically
andobjectives
with more
in order
to identify
interdependencies
One of the
of descriptive
the CA is todetail
generate
insights
into the development
of new
between
them,
and
second
to
discover
what
are
needed
(e.g.,
in
terms
of
tools,
guides,
guides and tools for optimizing the design, operation, financing and opportunities of
resources,
methods,
guidelines,
etc.)this
for objective,
overcoming
identified
challenges.
PEDs. This
paper is
aligned with
andthe
aims
to first define
exiting challenges
systematically and with more descriptive detail in order to identify interdependencies
2. Methods
between them, and second to discover what are needed (e.g., in terms of tools, guides,
methods,
guidelines, etc.) for overcoming the identified challenges.
2.1.resources,
A Three‐Stage
Approach

The openness of COST Action (https://www.cost.eu, accessed on 20 September
2. Methods
2021)to
fields of science
and technology as well as all different sectors, institutions and
2.1. Aall
Three-Stage
Approach
countries, has served as a great foundation for this paper to collect different experts’
The openness of COST Action (https://www.cost.eu, accessed on 16 September 2021)
perspectives on the needs for implementing PED. Thus, the methods used in this paper
to all fields of science and technology as well as all different sectors, institutions and
build on the COST Action’s PED European Network (PED‐EU‐NET), representing key
countries, has served as a great foundation for this paper to collect different experts’
professions, a range of cultures and climates, disciplines and experiences from different
perspectives on the needs for implementing PED. Thus, the methods used in this paper
sectors, but mainly academia’s perspectives (160 members from 38 countries: Albania,
build on the COST Action’s PED European Network (PED-EU-NET), representing key
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
professions, a range of cultures and climates, disciplines and experiences from different
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
sectors, but mainly academia’s perspectives (160 members from 38 countries: Albania,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Montenegro, Netherlands, North
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia,
Switzerland,
Turkey, and United Kingdom)
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Montenegro, Netherlands, North Macedonia,
The
first
stage Portugal,
of the approach
was
to carry
out aSpain,
literature
review
of the existing
Norway, Poland,
Romania,
Serbia,
Slovenia,
Sweden,
Switzerland,
Turkey,
state‐of‐the‐art
research
related
to
PEDs.
This
is
summed
up
in
the
Introduction
and
and United Kingdom).
ResultsThe
Section
this paper.
The second
stage
was toout
adopt
the Delphi
method,
which
is
firstof
stage
of the approach
was
to carry
a literature
review
of the
existing
a structured
communication
technique
that
relies
on
a
core
panel
of
experts
[12,13].
This
state-of-the-art research related to PEDs. This is summed up in the Introduction and
Results Section of this paper. The second stage was to adopt the Delphi method, which is
a structured communication technique that relies on a core panel of experts [12,13]. This
method was our main source of data, which were used to brainstorm and identify the
key challenges to implementing PEDs and what responses are needed to overcome them.
Debates with the expert panel (from Norway, United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Spain,

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

4 of 20

Ireland, Kosovo, Turkey and Lithuania) and continuous detailed individual discussions
led to a consolidation of the definition of these challenges and the interdependencies
between them. A third stage consisted of a survey of the wider PED-EU-NET membership
and a deeper literature review, as a supplementary method, to examine and validate the
results of the Delphi method, determine the ranking of the key challenges and whether
additional factors should be included. In addition, the survey and internal COST Action
meetings gave us an opportunity to collect the perspectives and feedbacks of the other
countries/disciplines on the existing challenges, increasing the representativeness of more
regions of Europe such as Hungry, Portugal, Germany and Switzerland.
While initiatives for creating PEDs are launched in many European cities, due to the
novelty of PEDs, the knowledge in this field is still limited, which has been a methodological
challenge for our research. In addition, the complex and multifaceted nature of PEDs make
the question of how to implement PEDs unanswered.
2.2. The Delphi Method
The 10 authors of this paper—experts drawn from the research and development
(R&D) community of PED-EU-NET—formed the core panel. The aim of the panel was
to identify the key challenges that confront the implementation of PEDs. The Delphi
method provided a structured communication and decision-making technique by which
the panel of experts can address the questions, led by a facilitator (in this instance, this
was Dr. Gohari Krangsås). Furthermore, the Delphi method is well suited as a research
instrument when there is incomplete knowledge about a problem or phenomenon [12,13].
Given the early stage of development of PEDs, and the very few case studies identified
as being in operation and realized to date—only two in Europe [14]—this method was
particularly appropriate and timely.
The principle of the method is that findings from a structured group of experts will be
more accurate than those from an unstructured, random, unrepresentative or undefined
group. By working with R&D experts with a breadth of ‘disinterested’ knowledge of PEDs,
supported by literature reviews, we tried to avoid the potentially distorting effects or the
gaps in knowledge of different special interest groups, such as political, business or citizen
representatives. We were then able to compare and contrast our findings with those of
others available in the literature, and where there may be vested interests, or where a more
unstructured approach has been adopted.
In this research, the Delphi method involved six months of iterations with the expert
panel, where initial decisions were recorded, revisited and reviewed before finally being
agreed upon. The first of these communications consisted of a brainstorming session
using ‘Padlet’ (https://padlet.com/, accessed on 16 September 2021), a collaborative web
platform hosted by the facilitator and via which panel members could share and organize
content to a virtual bulletin board. In total, four communications were held between
November 2020 and June 2021. The first meetings identified seven key topics/challenges
and the final one resulted in a detailed definition of each.
2.3. Survey
Once the Delphi method had revealed the seven challenges for implementing PED,
a survey was prepared using ‘Mentimeter’ (https://www.mentimeter.com/, accessed
on 16 September 2021, an online interactive polling tool. This survey consisted of three
sections: (1) to rank the seven factors in order of importance from a drop-down menu,
(2) to score each of the challenges in terms of the strength of agreement and (3) to use free
text to identify other factors to note. This survey was sent to the members of the PED-EUNET project during May 2021 with a response rate of 15%. Even though the number of
responses was fewer than we expected, it supported our qualitative research objective. Our
main focus in this research was to gather in-depth insights on the topic, which is not well
understood yet, in order to formulate a deep understanding about the main needs and
challenges of implementing PEDs, rather than establishing generalizable facts about this

Sustainability 2021, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

5 of 21

responses was fewer than we expected, it supported our qualitative research objective.
Our main focus in this research was to gather in‐depth insights on the topic, which is not
5 of 20
well understood yet, in order to formulate a deep understanding about the main needs
and challenges of implementing PEDs, rather than establishing generalizable facts about
this topic through math and statistical analysis. However, in future, a quantitative study
through math
and astatistical
analysis.
However,
in future,
a quantitative study can be
cantopic
be conducted
to draw
more general
conclusion
from
this research.
conducted to draw a more general conclusion from this research.
3. Seven Topics/Challenges Identified by the Delphi Method
3. Seven Topics/Challenges Identified by the Delphi Method
From the iterative Delphi method, the panel experts identified the following seven
From the iterative Delphi method, the panel experts identified the following seven
challenging topics, in provisional order of importance, representing what we need to
challenging topics, in provisional order of importance, representing what we need to
overcome to support the implementation of PEDs:
overcome to support the implementation of PEDs:
1. Governance: a need for new and innovative forms of collaborative governance;
1.
Governance: a need for new and innovative forms of collaborative governance;
2. Incentives: a need for right (social and environmental) drivers and motivators;
2.
Incentives: a need for right (social and environmental) drivers and motivators;
3. Social: a need for local community’s support and engagement;
3.
Social: a need for local community’s support and engagement;
4. Process: a need for integrated planning and decision‐making approaches;
4.
Process: a need for integrated planning and decision-making approaches;
5. Market: a need for an appropriate market design and business model;
5.
Market: a need for an appropriate market design and business model;
Technology: aa need
need for
for balancing
balancing energy
energydemand
demandand
andsupply
supplysystems;
systems;
6.6. Technology:
7.
Context:
a
need
for
considering
regional
and
local
differences.
7.
Context: a need for considering regional and local differences.
TheThe
four
of Good
Goodand
and
Ceseña
[15]−governance,
social,
market
and
fourcategories
categories of
Ceseña
[15]—governance,
social,
market
and technoltechnology
perspectives
(see Figure
1)−also
emerged
in our
findings
in the
same
ogy perspectives
(see Figure
1)—also
emerged
in our
findings
andand
in the
same
rankrank
order.
order.
This
result
provided
a
degree
of
confirmation
and
reassurance
that
the
This result provided a degree of confirmation and reassurance that the two methodstwo
were
methods
were compatible.
However,
our finding
highlights
theof
importance
three other
compatible.
However, our
finding highlights
the
importance
three otherofconsiderations,
considerations,
includingprocess
incentives,
process which
and context,
which rank
amongst
other
including incentives,
and context,
rank amongst
the other
fourthe
categories
four
categories
(Figure
2).
(Figure 2).

Figure 2. Survey results of ranking PED challenges showing the percentage of scores based on voting
Figure
2. Survey
rankingtoPED
showing
percentage
of scores
scores
of 7 for results
the firstofranking
1 forchallenges
the last ranking
outthe
of the
maximum
score. based on
voting scores of 7 for the first ranking to 1 for the last ranking out of the maximum score.

It also became evident in the Delphi events that there were multiple interactions between
It also
became
in the Delphi
events
were multiple
interactions
these
seven
topics.evident
The relationships
between
themthat
willthere
be discussed
in Section
5. Each PED
between
these
seven topics.
Thebelow
relationships
betweenthe
them
will be
discussed in Section
challenge
is described
briefly
before exploring
potential
interdependencies.
5. Each PED challenge is described briefly below before exploring the potential
3.1. A Need for a New and Innovative Forms of Collaborative Governance
interdependencies.
While technological innovation is a necessary to make PEDs, the challenge is not
3.1.primarily
A Need for
New and Innovative
Forms of
Collaborative Governance
ona technology,
but on service
transformation,
management, policy and improvement
[16].
The
bulk
of
research
effort
and
journal
space
devoted
documenting
While technological innovation is a necessary to makeis PEDs,
thetochallenge
is notthe
unintended
consequences,
paradoxes
and
shortcomings
of
the
traditional
governing
mode.
primarily on technology, but on service transformation, management, policy and
It
is
acknowledged
that
managing
all
the
aspects
of
a
smart
city
often
lies
beyond
improvement [16]. The bulk of research effort and journal space is devoted tothe
capabilities and
of the
traditional government.
new and
documenting
the mandates
unintended
consequences,
paradoxes Accordingly,
and shortcomings
ofinnovathe
tive
forms
of
governance
are
needed,
in
which
various
stakeholders,
including
citizens,
traditional governing mode. It is acknowledged that managing all the aspects of a smart
take part in the planning and decision-making process, share control over development
initiatives, collaboratively address problems and set priorities to build commitment and
ownership of the final planning outcome.
Governance is not the same as governing or government. While ‘governing’ refers to
those social activities, which make a “purposeful effort to guide, steer, control, or manage

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

6 of 20

(sectors or facets of) societies”, ‘governance’ describes “the patterns that emerge from the
governing activities of social, political and administrative actors” [17] (p. 2); and while
government centers on formal authority, governance refers to activities backed by shared
goals that may or may not derive from legal or formally prescribed responsibilities [11]
(p. 4). Thus, governance is associated with network structures, interdependency, trust
relations, negotiations and power relations among different actors, which contrasts with
the traditional hierarchical government. In this regard, the relational configuration of PED
governance can widely vary depending on the actors involved, their role, their impact and
the degree of (in)formality of relationships among them. Further, it is subject to change
during the networks’ lifecycle, which can be described in terms of the three main phases of
initiation, emergence and wider implementation or uptake. However, understanding of
these features and dynamics as well as the mechanisms of sharing different resources to
foster knowledge flows is still limited, and the question of ‘which governance model is the
best (if any)’ is under a lively debate in research and empirical practice [18]. In addition,
still there is no practical framework, method or model that can provide us with a better
understanding of the overarching functionality of the entire system within which different
stakeholders are collaborating. There is no guidance for conceptualizing the governance
processes, including the individuals’ roles and influences on outcomes, the way their power
is exercised and the degree to which the public and their interests should be involved. On
the other hand, without good governance, the identified challenges cannot be managed.
To understand what governance systems should be employed to support implementation of PEDs, the existing governance underpinning complex planning systems should
be analyzed and evaluated. Potts et al. [19] (p. 13) suggest considering how the system is
structured and organized, but also the way in which the structures in the system function.
Since different structures and functions of PEDs are interconnected and interdependent, the
first step is to deeply understand each identified topic/challenge and the synergy between
them in the context of an ever-changing, complex and unpredictable PED system.
3.2. A Need for Right Incentives
The adoption of the right incentives is a key issue to achieve PEDs. There are multiple
benefits stemming from ordinances creating incentives for renewable energy, including
economic, ecological and health benefits. In this regard, local governments have a variety of
options for creating incentives to support or subsidize the installation of renewable energy
equipment, including offering rebates on purchasing equipment, tax incentives, expedited
permitting and others [20]. Incentives can also be used by the private sector to encourage
cities, housing associations, households and companies to implement PEDs. The outcome
of incentives can be focused on supporting increased deployment of targeted technologies
and practices, environmental gains, livability and inclusiveness in districts. As Figure 3
represents, incentives can create additional local jobs in energy business, improving air
quality, benefitting public health and preventing energy poverty [20,21].
Providing the right incentives depends not only on the specific energy policies in a
specific context, but also on how related markets work, and especially how prices are set
in these markets [22]. Policies may seek to alter behavior by offering new and beneficial
technology, changing financial and other material incentives, changing attitudes and beliefs
with education and information, appealing to basic values or modifying institutional
structures that may range from international agreements down to community-level norms
and neighborhood organizations [23].
On the other hand, the same solutions are not working in different contexts due to the
impacts produced in each city [24]. Incentives are thus contextual and specific to energy
efficiency technology, as sizes, costs and/or performance measures, development level of
the district, local markets and consumer preferences. In this regard, incentives should be
designed tailormade. Accordingly, a robust technical and economic analysis of potential
technologies can support successful incentive design [20].

Sustainability
2021, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW
Sustainability 2021, 13,
10551

7 of 20

Figure 3. Main incentives achieved with the implementation of PEDs.

Figure 3. Main incentives achieved with the implementation of PEDs.

Högberg and Lind [25] stress the complexity of providing the right incentives, explaining how district heating tariffs may reduce incentives as they make it difficult for a
Providing the right incentives depends not only on the specific energy polici
customer to know how profitable a certain energy efficiency investment really is. There
specific context, but also on how related markets work, and especially how prices
have been cases in Sweden where a district heating company, owned by the municipality
in these markets [22]. Policies may seek to alter behavior by offering new and ben
and using a cost-based tariff, increased prices when energy consumption was reduced.
technology, changing financial and other material incentives, changing attitud
Such actions reduce the incentive for housing companies to invest in energy efficiency [19].
beliefs with education and information, appealing to basic values or mod
Therefore, it is important to investigate the incentive effects of various pricing principles
institutional structures that may range from international agreements do
on the profitability of energy-saving investments.
community‐level norms and neighborhood organizations [23].
Cox [20] suggests that providing the right incentives should aim at reducing limiOn the other hand, the same solutions are not working in different contexts
tations of long-term and low-interest investment funding schemes, regulatory barriers,
the
impacts
produced in and
eachunstable
city [24].policy
Incentives
are thusFurthermore,
contextual and spe
absence of economic support/subsidies
frameworks.
technology,
as sizes,
costs and/or
performance
measures, develo
to quantify theenergy
successefficiency
of adequate
incentives,
it is necessary
to consider
performance
level
of
the
district,
local
markets
and
consumer
preferences.
In
thisand
regard, ince
indicators, i.e., the effectiveness of the proposed urban solutions through monitoring
should
be
designed
tailormade.
Accordingly,
a
robust
technical
and
economic
ana
control systems [14] and impact indicators [26]. Finally, Cox [20] also argues that for propotential
technologies
can
support
successful
incentive
design
[20].
viding the right incentives all urban stakeholders involved in different phases must be
Högberg
and Lind
[25]and
stress
the complexity
providing
the
right ince
considered, including
such as target
markets
communities,
privateofsector,
utilities
and
explaining
how district heating tariffs may reduce incentives as they make it diffic
local government
institutions.
a customer to know how profitable a certain energy efficiency investment really is
have
been
cases in Sweden
where a district heating company, owned by the munic
3.3. A Need for the
Local
Community’s
Support
and
using
a
cost‐based
tariff,
increased of
prices
when energy
consumption
There is a widespread consensus on the importance
the citizens’
and end-users’
role was re
Such
actions
reduce
the
incentive
for
housing
companies
to
invest
in
energy eff
in sustainable energy transitions and changes from passive consumption to active prosump[19]. Therefore,
it is important
to perspectives
investigate the
effects and
of various p
tion and engagement
[2,27]. Integrating
the citizens’
intoincentive
decision-making
principles
on the profitability
of energy‐saving
investments.
design of services
and infrastructure
will increase
their impact. When
citizens are involved
Cox their
[20] acceptance
suggests that
providing
theand
right
shouldwill
aim at re
in the planning process,
will be
increased,
thus,incentives
implementation
limitations
of
long‐term
and
low‐interest
investment
funding
schemes,
regu
be easier. The perspectives of citizens as non-experts about local environment, context and
barriers,
absence
of
economic
support/subsidies
and
unstable
policy
frame
place can (re)discover more sustainable and creative solutions that fit in a specific local
to quantify
the success
of adequate
incentives,
it is[28].
necessary
to co
context, whichFurthermore,
might never have
been broached
or might
have been
forgotten
As
performance
indicators,
the effectiveness
of the proposed
urban
th
Halachmi and Holzer
[29] argue,
citizen i.e.,
participation
is an important
element not
onlysolutions
to
monitoring
and control
systems
[14]toand
impact
indicators productivity,
[26]. Finally, Cox [2
achieve the democratic
governance
process,
but also
increase
government
argues
that for
providing
the right
incentives
all urban
stakeholders
involved in di
citizen satisfaction,
citizens’
trust
in government
and
transparency
to make
decisions about
service levels, procedures
and
phases must
bepriorities.
considered, including such as target markets and communities, p
In PEDs, consumers
should
belocal
empowered
to drive
the transition by optimizing their
sector, utilities
and
government
institutions.
energy behaviors in day-to-day life, adopting lower carbon transport and heating options,
participating in 3.3.
demand
response
and energy
tradingSupport
activities, investing in energy-efficient
A Need
for the Local
Community’s
technologies and, more importantly, to be engaged in local energy initiatives. In order

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

8 of 20

to solve the challenges of the present energy systems, the focus should not only be on
individual behavioral change, but on system-wide transformation through collective action,
which is a successful motor of social transformation [23]. Thus, local citizens can be engaged
in community energy systems’ supply-side activities, such as collective purchasing of solar
panels or collective ownership of wind farms, and also demand-side activities, such as
energy conservation, retrofitting of dwellings or energy awareness-raising activities [30].
Engaging local communities in the energy market provides them with a better choice
of energy supply and possibility of producing and selling their own energy (as prosumers)
with real-time responses to price signals [31]. Koirala and Koliou [32] draw attention to the
factors that determine willingness of local citizens to participate in the local energy systems
and categorize them as follows: demographic and socio-economic (such as age, education,
family situation, home ownership, tax deduction and income), socio-institutional (such as
sense of community and trust) and environmental factors (such as ownership of distributed
energy resources, resiliency, environmental concern and desire to reduce CO2 emissions).
However, Paone and Bacher [33] argue that these factors can result in the uncertainty in
the prediction of occupant-related energy behavior, thus creating a gap between actual and
predicted energy performance of buildings within a block or district.
Massey and Verma [34], address the following challenges that exist for involving
local communities. Firstly, the lack of citizens’ and local organizations’ engagement in the
energy transition and the communication gap between government and community pose a
major challenge. Secondly, the absence of appropriate infrastructure for the transparency
of strategies/policies and daily engagement of community is a major barrier. Thirdly,
shortage of public trust in new energy technologies and a fear of not being able to adapt
are challenges. Fourthly, insufficiency of knowledge of citizens about technical topics
and policy, and finally, the lack of a model or structure for community engagement make
implementation difficult.
These challenges necessitate development of a clear roadmap, which can show the
transition to sustainable energy from the perspective of community participation, including policy and regulation, organizational and financial issues, as well as infrastructural
development.
3.4. A Need for Different Planning and Decision-Making Approaches
The decision-making process involves basically the problem, objectives, alternatives,
evaluation and implementation of the decision [35]. By an appropriate planning of these
meta-decisions, the decision makers would have more control over the process and can
reach better quality decisions with less time and resources invested, thus optimizing the
decision-making process [36].
The decision-making process of PEDs is strongly influenced by the complex interconnections between technical, economic and political factors. Even though many scientific
publications are dealing with decision-making frameworks and energy planning [37,38],
the focus is often on individual decision-making step, and there are no established democratized, multicriteria approaches [39,40].
Some theories assume that policies are set at a certain moment (rational approach)
and others assume that concurrent streams of problems, solutions and politics set a policy
(garbage can approach). However, in reality, policies result from a series of decisions taken
by various actors during a period of time [41]. Decisions are no longer arranged based
on a priori order and hierarchy, but on different iterative decision-making rounds. Each
round of decision making can change the direction of the match or the rules of the game
because new actors can appear, introducing new problems and solutions and a solution
for one actor could easily be a problem for another. As a result, decision making is about
dynamic combinations of sets of problems and solutions represented by different actors [42]
and different exogenous factors (e.g., the political and governmental priorities, contextual
differences, etc.).

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

9 of 20

In the planning of PEDs, where the interests and goals of the government, residents,
energy utilities companies, property developers and many other actors are confronted, it is
usual, for example, to establish a joint supply of electricity, heat and cooling for achieving
efficiency. In this regard, a joint, transparent and structured decision-making process
is therefore required to support the entire process from the preliminary design to the
operation of the supply concept. Specifically, the district’s energy supply should be climate
friendly, supply residents with energy at market prices and have the highest possible rate
of own consumption [43].
In addition, as highlighted in Section 3.1 in the first challenge “governance”, it is
widely recognized that social aspects play an essential role in the successful implementation of the PED [44]. In this sense, for example, one should consider that most studies
and practical experiences about PED are based on projects in newly built districts, where
the planning and integration of innovative solutions are less complex, and the ambition is
usually higher [2]. However, buildings in historic districts present particularly challenging
characteristics to ambitious energy refurbishment and therefore are usually not considered
in PED projects [10] due to the environmental and well-being problems of this kind of districts, coupled with severe regulatory limitations to implement energy efficiency measures
and to integrate renewable energy systems (RES) [45].
As concluded by Lyhne [46], decision-making processes are formed by a continuous
interaction between policymaking and planning, which is taking place in windows of
opportunities rather than formal approvals of plans and policies. Thus, it is not always
appropriate to treat policymaking and planning separately, but they should be considered
in the interaction with each other; in this interaction, public consultation, systematic
environmental analyses and transparency on alternatives are primarily related to choices
of planning character.
3.5. A Need for Appropriate Market Design
Setting up a PED is a complex process. It involves many stakeholders, each with their
interests, constraints and agendas. In the building market, three categories of stakeholders
can be identified [47]; policy, community and market. Each category has distinct roles in
the development of the PEDs.
Several studies on the barriers to energy efficiency [48] have shown that the lack of
an appropriate market can create barriers to implement PEDs. A market cannot function
properly due to the imperfect information or incomplete markets (that result in some
parties free riding) [15]. Information on how the market is designed and economic aspects
would support the municipalities to initiate the development of PED. On the other hand,
availability of PED technologies and their implementation depend on the planners and the
technology suppliers. Thus, PED’s market includes identifying the customer segments for
the interventions and the value that the PED will deliver for them. Additionally, it defines
the financial process as the activity system creates economic value [48].
Analysis of existing PEDs shows that both funding and feasible business models
rank very high among key aspects of PED development [2]. This can be expected because
managing different PED actors requires a high degree of coordination [49].
As Wüstenhagen and Boehnke [50] explain, adopting an appropriately designed
business model is an important opportunity to overcome some of the key barriers to the
market diffusion of sustainable energy technologies. Organizations may be able to convert
their supply chains and customer interfaces toward a sustainability focus, but they may not
consider links to other business model elements, such as value propositions and financial
models in exploring business model transitions [51]. A single company can never meet the
needs of a city, nor can a city implement innovative solutions without cooperation with
business partners from different sectors [52]. Business models are a tool to define different
stakeholders’ roles and coordinate their activities and interactions.
In essence, the business models can be seen as an outline that prescribes how the
enterprise delivers value to customers, entices customers to pay for value and converts

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

10 of 20

those payments into profit [53]. By describing the value, a company can offer to one or
several segments of customers, and the architecture of the firm and its network of partners
for creating, marketing and delivering this value and relationship capital, profitable and
sustainable revenue streams are generated [54].
One of the main challenges for PED implementation is that the different sectors’
business cases are not integral and tend to work in silos. There is no predefined single
business model for the successful development of a PED. Instead, a combination of different
business models has to be found for each stakeholder involved [49]. For example, the
energy market linked to a smart community implies a distributed and decentralized system
operation in which the energy can be generated, stored and distributed by a wide variety
of technologies close to the consumption points. The integration of multiple energy vectors
represents a great challenge for the management and control of the energy market. The
flexibility, reliability and manageability of the market require a high level of effectiveness
and automation in the generation and operation of the energy.
Furthermore, structures and policy instruments that mobilize the financing for the
investments on PED are required for the implementation. This can be achieved by direct
financing interventions to close the gap, as well as long-term perspective in the investment [55]. The best market design should satisfy the short-run efficiency—making the best
use of existing resources—and long-run efficiency—promoting efficient investment in new
resources [56]. PEDs have the potential for economic sustainability, due to cost efficiency
and self-consumption [57].
3.6. A Need for Balancing Demand and Supply
The increasing amount of installed distributed renewable generation is transforming
the generation side into a more variable and intermittent source of energy. The high
randomness produced by these renewable sources can lead to greater fluctuations on
the supply-side. In addition, the demand-side is becoming more active, emphasizing
the empowerment and engagement of consumers. New concepts are emerging such as
prosumers or customers that can produce and supply electricity and thermal energy [58].
“Integrating both factors together can result in demand and supply balancing issues,
requiring an optimized adjustment through advanced management and control techniques
to avoid losses in the flexibility efficiency and resilience of the energy systems.”
Due to the need to deal with uncertain and intermittent output and load shifting
of renewable energy systems (RES), energy storage is one of the most critical arguments
today [59]. Energy storage technologies can provide needed flexibility and resilience while
being more influential at the district level [60]. There are challenges in implementing
practical energy storage systems that can result in cost inefficiency and reduced energy
performance [61].
The energy balance in PEDs needs to devise effective energy strategies, including
power, gas and thermal energy networks [62]. The Set Plan Action 3.2 highlights the
necessity of integrated innovative solutions at the district scale [63] to achieve an annual
net zero energy import, net zero CO2 emissions and annual local surplus of renewable
production. The overall energy balance of a district must consider different factors both in
geographical and temporal terms, which are outlined as follows:

•
•
•
•
•

Available natural resources to determine renewable generation.
District characteristics (density, morphology and contextual factors) to define the
typology and seasonality of the energy consumption.
Available infrastructures to determine the energy vector interactions and control
systems.
Distributed poly-generation, considering the fluctuations produced by renewable
systems and possible interconnections with other energy networks.
Policies and regulations to manage the operations implemented that ensure the stability, accessibility and flexibility of the system.



Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551



typology and seasonality of the energy consumption.
Available infrastructures to determine the energy vector interactions and control
systems.
Distributed poly‐generation, considering the fluctuations produced by renewable
systems and possible interconnections with other energy networks.
11 of 20
Policies and regulations to manage the operations implemented that ensure the
stability, accessibility and flexibility of the system.

There is
calculating
thethe
energy
balance
of aof
district.
The
There
is no
nocommon
commonmethodology
methodologyfor
for
calculating
energy
balance
a district.
most
usual
methods
obtain
the
energy
positivity
through
different
indicators
such
as
non‐
The most usual methods obtain the energy positivity through different indicators such as
renewable primary
energy
ratioratio
[64] [64]
or on‐site
energy
ratioratio
[65].[65].
non-renewable
primary
energy
or on-site
energy
To illustrate
illustrate some
some key
key concepts
concepts of
of how
how different
different operators
operators can
can interplay
interplay with
with each
each
To
other, aaschematic
schematicdiagram
diagramisisshown
shownbelow.
below.
Figure
4 demonstrates
balance
depends
other,
Figure
4 demonstrates
thethe
balance
depends
on
on
the
available
elements
on
both
supply
and
demand‐sides
by
effectively
interacting
the available elements on both supply and demand-sides by effectively interacting with
withstorage
the storage
as thebuffer.
energy
buffer.
reach
this goal,
integrative
urban
the
units asunits
the energy
To reach
thisTogoal,
integrative
urban
infrastructures
infrastructures
that
take
advantage
of
local
and
renewable
resources,
ICT
systems,
that take advantage of local and renewable resources, ICT systems, efficient innovative
efficient innovative
technologies,
adequate
planning
the flexibility
of are
the
technologies,
adequate
urban planning
and theurban
flexibility
of the and
regulatory
framework
regulatory[66].
framework are necessary [66].
necessary

Figure
Figure 4.
4. Urban
Urban flows
flows in
in the
the energy
energy balance
balance of
of PEDs.
PEDs.

To achieve an optimal operation for a multi-vectoral optimization, thermal, electrical
and gas flows need to be considered comprehensively together with the influence that
these energy vectors exert on other ones [67,68]. To do this, a PED system needs to leverage
advanced ICT, big data and automation techniques to obtain high reliability and a low
response time on integrated infrastructures, which is technically challenging [69].
It is worth noting that an effective system operation is also influenced by the environment, management system, positivity calculations or regulatory restrictions. Given
this, it is essential to set up a common methodology to quantify global energy balance
and environmental benefit of a smart urban system through the combination of several
performance indicators [14]. In fact, there is no standard at this point to calculate the
positivity of an energy balance at the district level, and the energy flows between the
buildings and energy systems are very case specific and sometimes complex to understand [70]. Standards can help but may not be user-friendly and interpretable [71]; for
instance, which loads/elements should be included in the calculation, which renewable
energy technologies should be considered and which primary energy factors should be
used are all challenges to be solved.

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

12 of 20

3.7. A Need for Considering Different Contextual Factors
As all the aforementioned challenges have described, the successful implementation
of PEDs is highly dependent on a context-specific approach that includes the interactions
between regional socio-political, technical, spatial and economic factors.
The Paris Climate Agreement (2015), requiring net zero emissions by the middle of
this century, has led to binding interim targets and is supported by numerous building
and energy directives [70]. Given that by 2050 the building stock will consist of 85% of old
buildings that currently exist, any intervention (whether building a new or refurbishment)
must strive to be ‘positive energy’ in order to meet the overall targets.
The technology and knowledge required to achieved PEDs already exists—put simply,
the use of renewable sources for building energy use needs to double and gas usage needs
to be halved [55]. However, the emissions reduction ambition remains a challenge in the
context of “disappointing levels of improvement in energy efficiency across policy fields”
across European regions [72], so it is clear that other contextual factors are at play.
Egger and Gignac [72] identified a key strategy: to develop stronger and diverse
narratives that respond to the regional context. These should address the wider value
of PEDs, including opportunities for local jobs, industry and competitiveness. A focus
on new messages is required—beyond energy or climate imperatives—that is relevant to
get the acceptance and participation of local stakeholders. This implies that any generic
framework for implementing PEDs requires a nuanced and bespoke interpretation that
enables it to respond to the specific locale.
In planning terms, urban contexts provide challenges and opportunities for the development of PEDs. City center neighborhoods are typically dense and historic, with a mix of
uses and ownership patterns. This in turn creates different temporal and spatial patterns
of energy demand. Whilst one part of a district may require cooling during a summer’s
afternoon (e.g., a commercial office building) another may need energy for hot water or
cooking in the evening (e.g., in housing).
Thus, there are opportunities to balance energy demands across a district and relate
them to bespoke renewable energy provision and storage strategies suited to the context.
For example, existing technologies, such as ground source heat exchange and combined
heat and power (CHP), combined with energy refurbishment may be most appropriate
in high-density, geometrically complex or historic urban areas where visual and technical
integration is a challenge [73]. Conversely, solar and wind energy strategies are more easily
incorporated in new and less-dense neighborhoods where more opportunity is established
for solar roofscapes, or space for wind generation can be allocated from the outset of the
project [73].
Most studies tend to assume or focus on new districts where the planning and integration of energy systems can be more easily and efficiently achieved compared to established
or historic districts [70]. This has some merit in terms of early adoption and pilot projects.
More rapid development of PEDs should be pursued in contexts where strategies are especially economical, reducing the overall cost for a region or city. This would help to offset
the challenge of creating PEDs in contexts where implementation may be more difficult or
costly, and where the lessons learnt from early adopting districts can be subsequently and
progressively applied within a timeframe to meet the policy targets.
4. The Survey
The survey we conducted for our research not only produced a ranking of which PED
factor was considered the most important, as shown in Figure 2, but also asked subjects
to score to what extent they agreed about the importance of individual factors (i.e., not in
comparison to other factors) (see Figure 5). The results are used to examine how much
consistency there is amongst experts for each PED topic/challenge.

4. The Survey

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

The survey we conducted for our research not only produced a ranking of which
PED factor was considered the most important, as shown in Figure 2, but also asked
subjects to score to what extent they agreed about the importance of individual factors
13 of 20
(i.e., not in comparison to other factors) (see Figure 5). The results are used to examine
how much consistency there is amongst experts for each PED topic/challenge.

Figure5.5.Degree
Degree
agreement
within
each
PED
factor
independently,
ranked
in order
of most
Figure
of of
agreement
within
each
PED
factor
independently,
ranked
in order
of most
positive
(i.e.,
combined
‘agree’
(grey)
and
‘strongly
agree’
(black)
percentages).
positive (i.e., combined ‘agree’ (grey) and ‘strongly agree’ (black) percentages).

Thegraph
graphabove
abovereveals
revealsthat
thatthere
there isis aa range
range of
of responses
responses for
for each
each topic.
topic. Overall,
Overall,
The
there
was
a
predominant
agreement
for
the
seven
PED
topic
categories,
with
68%
ofvotes
votes
there was a predominant agreement for the seven PED topic categories, with 68% of
being
positive
and
only
20%
negative.
The
governance
and
incentives
categories
drive
being positive and only 20% negative. The governance and incentives categories drive this
this overall
finding
scored
most
positive
75%.
contrast,the
thecontext
contextcategory
category
overall
finding
and and
scored
the the
most
positive
at at
75%.
InIncontrast,
elicitedmore
morepolarized
polarizedresponses
responseswith
with54%
54%in
inagreement
agreementand
and33%
33%in
indisagreement.
disagreement.When
When
elicited
comparing between factors, the scores (see Figure 2) largely matched the rankings (see
comparing between factors, the scores (see Figure 2) largely matched the rankings (see
Figure 5). Governance scored with the greatest agreement and context with the lowest
Figure 5). Governance scored with the greatest agreement and context with the lowest
agreement, coinciding with their overall ranking positions of first and seventh, respectively
agreement, coinciding with their overall ranking positions of first and seventh,
(see Figure 2). Social factors were an anomaly and showed less agreement than might
respectively (see Figure 2). Social factors were an anomaly and showed less agreement
be expected from the overall ranking in third place. Here, social ranked sixth in terms
than might be expected from the overall ranking in third place. Here, social ranked sixth
of degree of agreement. This suggests that more focus, knowledge and dissemination is
in terms of degree of agreement. This suggests that more focus, knowledge and
required in this sector, given its overall importance in this and previous studies.
dissemination is required in this sector, given its overall importance in this and previous
studies.
5. Discussion
The previous section detailed the seven topics/challenges to the implementation of
5. Discussion
PEDs identified by the Delphi method, explaining why each is important and what needs
previous
section
the the
seven
topics/challenges
to the
implementation
of
to beThe
done
to manage
themdetailed
to support
implementation
of PEDs.
Our
contention is that
PEDs
identified
bybe
theaddressed
Delphi method,
explaining
whyPEDs.
each is
important
andare
what
needs
all seven
need to
to deliver
successful
Although
there
different
to
be done
to manage
them
to support
implementation
PEDs.
Our
is that
ways
of defining
the key
factors,
these the
definitions
depend toofan
extent
on contention
the perspective
of
all
seven
need
to
be
addressed
to
deliver
successful
PEDs.
Although
there
are
different
the originators (whether municipalities, engineers, citizens, etc.). Despite this, the literature
ways
of defining
the are
keycommon
factors, these
definitionsthemes,
dependalthough
to an extent
suggests
that there
and recurring
noton
allthe
thatperspective
have been
of
the originators
municipalities,
engineers, citizens, etc.). Despite this, the
identified
here are (whether
always present
in the literature.
The reviewed literature, which studied one or some of these topics, has not considered
the iterative and evolving interactions between them, and the interrelationships between
them are not explicitly defined and argued [2,15,74]. Thus, many studies failed to realize
or discuss all the interconnected components of PEDs that can also impact the governance
and outcomes of the planning and decision-making process. In addition, the significance of
context (such as political, cultural and economic), as well as time and external factors, have
been largely overlooked. As a result, the literature has provided a quite static presentation
of PED systems and does not show a real complex process of transformation and change.
To bridge the existing gaps, Table 1 summarizes the identified seven topics/challenges and
the interrelation between them, and thereby discusses what is needed (e.g., what resources,
capacity, information, etc.) to manage these challenges to support the implementation
of PEDs.

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

14 of 20

Table 1. Summary of challenges to PEDs’ implementation.
Brief Description

Challenge

What Is Needed to Overcome
the Challenge?

Governance

System of rule and collaborative
activities backed by shared
goals that may or may not
derive from legal or formally
prescribed responsibilities.

There is no governance model
or guidance to conceptualize the
social and political mechanisms
behind implementation of PEDs,
clarifying different actors’ roles
and responsibilities in different
stages of planning and
decision-making processes.

A systematic understanding of
the social and political
mechanisms by which the
governance system is being
processed and a methodological
tool to capture these
mechanisms.

Incentives

Different social, economic and
environmental initiatives
should be merged in the
political system to support
deployment of targeted
technologies, environmental
gains, livability and
inclusiveness in districts.

Incentives are contextual and
depend on energy technology,
market and policies. Providing
the right incentives is complex
and requires dynamic and
iterative monitoring and
evaluation systems.

A systematic review and
understanding of the context,
including policies, technologies,
market and local preferences. In
addition, it requires a
collaborative monitoring and
evaluation model (taking into
account the process).

The energy transmission
requires end-users’ change from
passive consumption to active
prosumption and engagement.

There is a lack of engagement
culture and infrastructure, lack
of public trust and knowledge
about technology and process
and lack of a joint participatory
method, model or roadmap.

Participatory methods and
protocols, appropriate
education and knowledge
sharing, a participatory
governance model and market
design, right incentives and a
funding scheme can increase the
local support.

Process

Effective and sustainable
planning requires dynamic and
incremental decision-making
approaches to support decision
makers to effectively respond to
different evolving technologies,
policies, actors and processes.

Decision making should
consider the dynamic
combinations of problems and
solutions represented by
different actors and exogenous
factors. Without an appropriate
decision-making approach,
different actors can muster
power or oppose a decision and
cause the stagnation and
prolongation of a process.

A joint dynamic, iterative and
transparent decision-making
approach or model is required
that continuously
interacts with the planning
processes for PEDs and
considers the contextual (such
as political, economic, cultural
and social) factors.

Market

Business models that consider
the whole process of building,
operating and maintaining
PEDs can help to coordinate the
stakeholders and define their
roles for value creation.

There is no predefined single
business model for the
successful development of a
PED; thus, different
stakeholders can adopt their
own referred business model.
This can create complexity,
incohesion and inefficiency.

A joint and holistic business
model is needed to identify
customer segments and revenue
streams, which can also suggest
policy instruments to
mobilize investments.

Technology

Combination of innovative
solutions can help to get annual
net zero energy import, net zero
CO2 emissions and annual local
surplus production of
renewable energy. By balancing
demand and supply, we can
increase the flexibility, efficiency
and resilience of the energy
systems.

Balancing between supply and
demand is contextual and
complex. The lack of standard,
affordable seasonal and
long-duration energy storage
systems for heating, cooling and
electricity as well as integration
of ICT, big data and automation
techniques with each other and
different infrastructures are
challenging.

Common methodology to
quantify the positivity of the
district through the combination
of several performance
indicators. This requires an
integrative urban infrastructure
that incorporates all urban
flows as well as advanced
measurement and processing
technologies.

Categories

Social

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

15 of 20

Table 1. Cont.
Categories

Brief Description

Challenge

What Is Needed to Overcome
the Challenge?

Context

Any generic framework for
implementing PEDs should
respond to the specific social,
political, climate, economic, etc.
locale.

It is very difficult to develop a
generic and replicable solution
that is adaptative to the
contextual characteristics.

A systematic understanding of
how different contextual factor
can affect different topics,
challenges and aspects of
implementing PEDs.

Governance has the most connections to the other factors, reinforcing its primacy as a
challenge for PEDs. This challenge is created when a wide spectrum of stakeholders, who
share interests, information and resources to develop PEDs, create distributed and pluralistic efforts into the design and implementation, and none of them has complete control
over the outcomes. Therefore, all the identified topics/challenges highlight a necessity of
collaboration between different actors across sectors and levels. In this regard, managing
the identified challenges depends on the development of a practical and evidence-based
governance model.
Even though the significance of governance is recognized, there is still a little knowledge about which type of structure and functionality is needed for the design and enactment of PEDs. This requires conceptualization and analysis of the underlying governance
practices, addressing which actors, institutions, processes and relational mechanisms at
different levels of society can influence the development of PEDs. There is a need to
understand how in a world of complexity, conflicting values and interests and human and
institutional imperfection of certain governance systems can be effective. To develop a
systematic understanding of the social and political mechanisms by which the governance
system is being assessed, there is a need for methodological tools that can capture these
mechanisms.
According to the findings, the Social factors of PEDs elicit a more polarized set of
responses related to their significance. This suggests that this is an area that, although
widely recognized as important, warrants specific attention, development and integration
in a PED framework or toolkit. This calls for development of a bottom-up, democratic and
inclusive perspective and culture that can serve as a mechanism to facilitate communication
across all levels of the government structures to ensure that the development of PEDs is
conducted in a way that benefits a broader range of its inhabitants. In the PED context,
attention is increasingly paid to technological innovations and implementation of high-tech
solutions, while citizen-centric investigations, i.e., how residents perceive these changes
and how their lives or experiences are affected, are limited. In this regard, the necessity
of taking people’s experience into consideration while still integrating innovations for
continuous development of place should be a fundamental principle and reasoning behind
the creation of PEDs. To ensure a feedback loop and community-centered processes, a
development of a participatory method and culture is essential, which should be integrated
with the local planning and decision-making approaches.
Through inclusive and collaborative governance, the planning and decision-making
Process of PEDs can also be shifted towards ongoing, evolving and transformative learning,
where insights from a broad range of stakeholders and disciplines can be garnered. In the
shadow of real collaborative networks, certain resilience and adaptability to new changes,
ambiguity and long-term consequences of planning and decisions can be provided. Often,
the design process cannot be reduced to a simple decision criterion and decision maker,
but different perspectives and technological alternatives must be included. For the energy
supply of a district where many different stakeholders are involved with different objectives,
this idea is particularly true. Especially in projects involving many actors, such as private
companies, private persons and other institutions with different interests and expectations,
the planning process takes a long time. In the planning of districts where the interests of the
public, residents, energy utilities companies, property developers and many others meet,

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

16 of 20

these complex structures are particularly common. All these must meet the expectations
and needs of all stakeholders who additionally require a joint, transparent, objective and
structured decision-making process that supports the entire process from the preliminary
design to the operation of the supply concept.
The coordination of stakeholders, including policy makers and citizens, is also crucial
for designing an appropriate Market, referring to the access to finance and the deployment
of successful business models in the supply chain. The tools and resource for effective
governance will support the market organization as well. Moreover, the supply chain
organization is one of the mechanisms that governance needs to process, which is also
determined by Contextual and social parameters. To that end, the market cannot be seen
as an autonomous process, but it is interlinked with the social and contextual aspects of
the PEDs. The market design is part of the complexity that requires successful governance
to be addressed.
Positivity in the energy balance (Technology) of a district requires an inclusive approach that considers all urban sectors and the synergies between them. To establish a
common methodology, a decision-making process is needed considering technical, economic, environmental, political and contextual factors. Optimized management of this
flexible system requires a governance model that encourages citizen participation and
Sustainability 2021, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW
17 of 21 of
market operations adapted to the generation and consumption profiles. The application
right Incentives can help to achieve positivity in the energy balance, leading to solutions
that would not be economically viable on a building scale. An appropriate process also
supports
realization
of this balance,
ensuring
the transformation
of data intowill
informaroutine
partthe
of PEDs’
operations,
there is greater
likelihood
that this information
be
tion necessary to support decisions. When information is generated as a routine part of
used directly to make mid‐course corrections and modifications in the implementation
PEDs’ operations, there is greater likelihood that this information will be used directly to
phase. Regarding the fact that the learning associated with participating in such a process
make mid-course corrections and modifications in the implementation phase. Regarding
is experiential and innovative, an integrated planning and decision‐making approach
the fact that the learning associated with participating in such a process is experiential
enriched with collaborative governance can bring a deep sense of meaningfulness to the
and innovative, an integrated planning and decision-making approach enriched with
work.
collaborative governance can bring a deep sense of meaningfulness to the work.
The definitions and descriptions of the PED factors that are developed for this work
The definitions and descriptions of the PED factors that are developed for this work
reveal the interrelationship and overlaps between them (see Figure 6). This implies that
reveal the interrelationship and overlaps between them (see Figure 6). This implies that no
no single parameter can be considered in isolation of the others and that no factor can be
single parameter can be considered in isolation of the others and that no factor can be left
left out in order not to skew an assessment of PEDs.
out in order not to skew an assessment of PEDs.

Figure 6. Simplified interdependency network of first two interactions for each PED challenge
Figure 6. Simplified interdependency network of first two interactions for each PED challenge
demonstrating the importance for an integrated and holistic PED framework.
demonstrating the importance for an integrated and holistic PED framework.

6. Conclusions
6. Conclusion
The paper asks what the needs for the implementation of PEDs are. To answer
The
paper
what thethe
needs
for the
implementation
PEDs
are.
answerexperts
this,
this, we
triedasks
to identify
existing
challenges
throughofthe
eyes
ofTo
different
wewho
triedare
to identify
the
existing
challenges
through
the
eyes
of
different
experts
who
arethe
involved in different projects and initiative related to PEDs. Identifying
involved
in
different
projects
and
initiative
related
to
PEDs.
Identifying
the
challenges
challenges would help us to realize the needs (technical and non-technical), as well as
would help us to realize the needs (technical and non‐technical), as well as the tools and
resources that can address those challenges. The paper used the Delphi method, following
by the iterative discussion processes and survey, which allowed for real cooperation,
generating feedback mechanisms and meeting the needs for flexibility and adaptability in

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

17 of 20

the tools and resources that can address those challenges. The paper used the Delphi
method, following by the iterative discussion processes and survey, which allowed for real
cooperation, generating feedback mechanisms and meeting the needs for flexibility and
adaptability in the planning phases of PEDs. Seven challenges were identified, defined and
ranked in this study, named the governance, incentive, social, market, process, technology
and context factors. Our finding shows the interrelationship and overlap between the
challenges, meaning that managing one challenge to a greater or lesser extent is reliant on
the management of the other challenges. In this regard, being confined to only a technical
aspect or any individual challenge and failing to consider/scrutinize other effective and
interdependent factors/challenges, are two of the main barriers to implementation of PEDs.
Therefore, we needed to discover the pattern of their interrelationship and identify which
challenge should be dealt with first and why. The outcomes highlighted the significance of
the role of governance, which provides the necessary conditions to support all other PED
factors. Processes of design and implementation of PEDs are often hierarchical, ranging
from international ambitions to local conditions. However, it is evident that top-down
diktats are not effective on their own, and that bottom-up, locally relevant narratives
are necessary to enhance engagement and success. By developing a holistic, dynamic
and iterative collaborative governance model that is context based, it is possible to move
forward towards managing the other challenges.
The analysis of the challenges to PEDs implementation and the tools and resources
that are needed to address those challenges revealed a common need for systematic understanding of the processes behind those challenges, as well as models and protocols to
manage the complexity. Success in developing PED solutions requires a model based on
cross-disciplinary collaboration and a co-creation approach that reduces the gap between
politics administration, the business sector and society or science and technology, jointly
weighing all the challenges that this implementation requires.
None of the reviewed literature and theories is exhaustive in describing each challenge
in interconnection with others, and there is no appropriate model, tool or guide that can
explain how to manage each challenge considering the influence of other factors. This
paper argues that the integration and inclusion of the components of these challenges is
necessary to completely understand the real dynamics of PEDs processes. Each factor
(political, social, environmental, procedural, economic, technological and contextual) in
interaction with other factors can provide a nuanced view of the outcomes of each phase of
PEDs processes. Hence, the outcomes are likely to be poorly understood if these factors are
looked at exclusively and independently. On the other hand, due to their interaction and
interconnection, the boundaries between them are also blurred.
The researchers acknowledge that each of the seven challenges is quite big, and it is
difficult to thoroughly explore the significance of each for implementation of PEDs. The
contribution of this paper is not to develop the theories/models of these concepts, but
to explain their significance in design, planning and implementation of PEDs. Therefore,
these issues need to be addressed in greater depth, as arguing what exactly should be done
and how it should be done is beyond the scope of this paper.
This paper can be seen as a starting point for exploring the tools and resources that are
needed for managing the challenges of PEDs through an integrated and holistic approach
of design, planning and implantation. It has been an attempt to explain how the integration
of aspects of PEDs can put realism into the study that can overcome the partial explanation
that an individual theory, model or tool can provide. In this regard, future research
can explore the interdependency between the challenges more deeply and contribute to
development of a cross-disciplinary and holistic “conceptual and procedural framework”
based on the required tools, guidelines and targets that different districts or cities may need
to implement PED. This is the ambition of the PED-EU-NET action.
More research is also recommended to apply such integrated and holistic approaches
and to test/integrate different factors to underpin a practical analysis of the complex
planning of PEDs and to provide evidence-based results. Even though the collaborators

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

18 of 20

of this paper do not represent the whole of Europe, this paper targets all the European
countries (and beyond), and since the COST Action is still ongoing, the results of this paper
can be the basis of the future research works, which can be redeveloped in collaboration
with other international programs/initiatives such as Annex 83.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.G.K., K.S., T.K., S.S. and N.M.; methodology, S.G.K.,
K.S., T.K., S.S., M.L., E.G., B.P., T.A., L.M. and N.M.; analysis, S.G.K., K.S., T.K., S.S., M.L., E.G., B.P.,
T.A., L.M. and N.M.; writing—original draft preparation, S.G.K., K.S., T.K., S.S., M.L., E.G., B.P.,
T.A., L.M. and N.M.; writing—review and editing, S.G.K., K.S., T.K., S.S., M.L., E.G., B.P. and T.A.;
visualization, K.S. and S.S.; supervision, S.G.K., K.S., T.K., S.S. and N.M.; project administration,
S.G.K.; All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding. The Article Processing Charges (APC) was
funded by COST (European Cooperation in Science and Technology) under the Action Positive
Energy Districts European Network (PED-EU-NET).
Acknowledgments: This article is based upon work from COST Action Positive Energy Districts
European Network (PED-EU-NET), supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science and
Technology, www.cost.eu).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

Madlener, R.; Sunak, Y. Impacts of urbanization on urban structures and energy demand: What can we learn for urban energy
planning and urbanization management? Sustain. Cities Soc. 2011, 1, 45–53. [CrossRef]
Bossi, S.; Gollner, C.; Theierling, S. Towards 100 Positive Energy Districts in Europe: Preliminary Data Analysis of 61 European
Cases. Energies 2020, 13, 6083. [CrossRef]
Ferrante, A.; Fotopoulou, A.; Mazzoli, C. Sustainable Urban Regeneration through Densification Strategies: The Kallithea District
in Athens as a Pilot Case Study. Sustainability 2020, 12, 9462. [CrossRef]
Alpagut, B.; Akyürek, Ö.; Mitre, E.M. Positive Energy Districts Methodology and Its Replication Potential. Proceedings 2019, 20, 8.
[CrossRef]
Amaral, A.R.; Rodgrigues, E.; Rodrigues Gaspar, A.; Gomes, A. Review on performance aspects of nearly zero-energy districts.
Sustain. Cities Soc. 2018, 43, 406–420. [CrossRef]
Saheb, Y.; Shnapp, S.; Johnson, C. The Zero Energy concept: Making the whole greater than the sum of the parts to meet the Paris
Climate Agreement's objectives. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 2018, 30, 138–150. [CrossRef]
Brozovsky, J.; Gustavsen, A.; Gaitani, N. Zero Emission Neighbourhoods and Positive Energy Districts–A State-of-the-Art Review.
Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021, 72, 103013. [CrossRef]
Hearn, X.A.; Sohre, A.; Burger, P. Innovative but unjust? Analysing the opportunities and justice issues within positive energy
districts in Europe. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2021, 78, 102127. [CrossRef]
Aghamolaei, R.; Shamsi, M.; Tahsildoost, M.; O’Donnell, J. Review of district-scale energy performance analysis: Outlooks
towards holistic urban frameworks. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2018, 41, 252–264. [CrossRef]
European Commission. Open Innovation, Open Science, Open to the World—A Vision for Europe; Publications Office of the European
Union: Luxembourg, 2015.
Rosenau, J.N.; Czempiel, E.-O. Governance Without Government: Order and Change in World Politics; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, UK, 1992; Volume 20.
Skulmoski, J.G.; Hartman, F.T.; Krahn, J. The Delphi Method for Graduate Research. J. Inf. Technol. Educ. Res. 2007, 6, 1–21.
[CrossRef]
Linstone, A.H.; Turoff, M. The Delphi Method: Techniques and Applications; Addison-Wesley: London, UK, 1975.
Angelakoglou, K.; Kourtzanidis, K.; Giourka, P.; Apostolopoulos, V.; Nikolopoulos, N.; Kantorovi, J. From a Comprehensive
Pool to a Project-Specific List of Key Performance Indicators for Monitoring the Positive Energy Transition of Smart Cities—An
Experience-Based Approach. Smart Cities 2020, 3, 705–735. [CrossRef]
Good, N.; Martinez Cesena, E.A.; Mancarella, P.; Monti, A.; Pesch, D.; Ellis, K. Barriers, Challenges, and Recommendations
Related to Development of Energy Positive Neighborhoods and Smart Energy Districts. In Energy Positive Neighborhoods and
Smart Energy Districts; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2017; pp. 251–274.
Nam, T.; Pardo, T.A. Smart city as urban innovation: Focusing on management, policy, and context. In Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, Tallin, Estonia, 26–29 September 2011; ACM:
New York, NY, USA, 2011.
Kooiman, J. Modern Governance: New Government-Society Interactions; Sage: Newbury Park, CA, USA, 1993; p. 280.
Jordan, A. The Governance of Sustainable Development: Taking Stock and Looking Forwards. Environ. Plan. C Gov. Policy 2008,
26, 17–33. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.

19 of 20

Potts, R.; Vella, K.; Dale, A.; Sipe, N. Exploring the usefulness of structural–functional approaches to analyse governance of
planning systems. Plan. Theory 2014, 15, 162–189. [CrossRef]
Cox, S. Financial Incentives to Enable Clean Energy Deployment: Policy Overview and Good Practices; National Renewable Energy Lab
(NREL): Golden, CO, USA, 2016.
Lelieveld, J.; Evans, J.; Fnais, M.; Giannadaki, D.; Pozzer, A. The contribution of outdoor air pollution sources to premature
mortality on a global scale. Nature 2015, 525, 367–371. [CrossRef]
Lind, H. Pricing principles and incentives for energy efficiency investments in multi-family rental housing: The case of Sweden.
Energy Policy 2012, 49, 528–530. [CrossRef]
Stern, P.C. Information, incentives, and proenvironmental consumer behavior. J. Consum. Policy 1999, 22, 461–478. [CrossRef]
Csukás, S.M.; Szabó, R.Z. The many faces of the smart city: Differing value propositions in the activity portfolios of nine cities.
Cities 2021, 112, 103116. [CrossRef]
Högberg, L.; Lind, H. Incitament för Energieffektivisering i 60-och 70-Talets Bostadsbestånd. Uppsats. 2011. Available
online: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Hans-Lind/publication/268008530_Incitament_for_energieffektivisering_i_
60-och_70-talets_bostadsbestand/links/54e5a4630cf22703d5c1981c/Incitament-foer-energieffektivisering-i-60-och-70-taletsbostadsbestand.pdf (accessed on 16 September 2021).
Hamdan, A.H.; Andersen, P.H.; de Boer, L. Stakeholder collaboration in sustainable neighborhood projects—A review and
research agenda. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021, 68, 102776. [CrossRef]
Ahlers, D.; Driscoll, P.; Wibe, H.; Wyckmans, A. Co-Creation of Positive Energy Blocks. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2019,
352, 012060. [CrossRef]
Salaj, A.T.; Gohari, S.; Senior, C.; Xue, Y.; Lindkvist, C. An interactive tool for citizens’ involvement in the sustainable regeneration.
Facilities 2020, 38, 859–870. [CrossRef]
Halachmi, A.; Holzer, M. Citizen participation and performance measurement: Operationalizing democracy through better
accountability. Public Adm. Q. 2010, 34, 378–399.
Flor, A.; Rick, B.; Niki, F.; Sanne, A.; Philip, B.; Jesse, H.; Geerte, P.; Bonno, P.; Daniel, S.; Julia, W. The (Self) Governance of Community
Energy: Challenges & Prospects; Dutch Research Institute for Transitions (DRIFT): Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2014.
Hoffman, M.S.; High-Pippert, A. From private lives to collective action: Recruitment and participation incentives for a community
energy program. Energy Policy 2010, 38, 7567–7574. [CrossRef]
Koirala, B.P.; Koliou, E.; Friege, J.; Hakvoort, R.; Herder, P. Energetic communities for community energy: A review of key issues
and trends shaping integrated community energy systems. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016, 56, 722–744. [CrossRef]
Paone, A.; Bacher, J.-P. The impact of building occupant behavior on energy efficiency and methods to influence it: A review of
the state of the art. Energies 2018, 11, 953. [CrossRef]
Massey, B.; Verma, P.; Khadem, S. Citizen engagement as a business model for smart energy communities. In Proceedings of the
5th International Symposium on Environment-Friendly Energies and Applications (EFEA), Rome, Italy, 24–26 September 2018.
Shimizu, Y.; Kato, Y.; Kariyahara, T. Prototype development for supporting multiobjective decision making in an ill-posed
environment. J. Chem. Eng. Jpn. 2010, 43, 691–697. [CrossRef]
De Sousa, W.H. Planning the decision making process: A multiple case study. Eng. Manag. Res. 2015, 4, 82. [CrossRef]
Becchio, C.; Bottero, M.; Corgnati, S.; Dell’Anna, F. Decision making for sustainable urban energy planning: An integrated
evaluation framework of alternative solutions for a NZED (Net Zero-Energy District) in Turin. Land Use Policy 2018, 78, 803–817.
[CrossRef]
Majidi, M.; Mohammadi-Ivatloo, B.; Soroudi, A. Application of information gap decision theory in practical energy problems: A
comprehensive review. Appl. Energy 2019, 249, 157–165. [CrossRef]
Csukás, S.M.; Bukovszki, V.; Reith, A. Challenges and Solutions for Organizational Design in Urban Digitalization. Eur. J. Sustain.
Dev. 2020, 9, 615. [CrossRef]
Polatidis, H.; Haralamboloulos, D.; Munca, G.; Vreek, R. Selecting an appropriate multi-criteria decision analysis technique for
renewable energy planning. Energy Sources Part B 2006, 1, 181–193. [CrossRef]
Soroudi, A.; Amraee, T. Decision making under uncertainty in energy systems: State of the art. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2013,
28, 376–384. [CrossRef]
Teisman, G.R. Models for research into decision-making processes: On phases, streams and decision-making rounds. Public Adm.
2000, 78, 937–956. [CrossRef]
Schmeling, L.; Schonfeldt, P.; Klement, P.; Wehkamp, S.; Hanke, B.; Agert, C. Development of a decision-making framework for
distributed energy systems in a German district. Energies 2020, 13, 552. [CrossRef]
Stanica, D.-I.; Karasu, A.; Brandt, D.; Kriegel, M.; Brandt, S.; Steggan, C. A methodology to support the decision-making process
for energy retrofitting at district scale. Energy Build. 2021, 238, 110842. [CrossRef]
Gregório, V.; Seixas, J. Energy savings potential in urban rehabilitation: A spatial-based methodology applied to historic centres.
Energy Build. 2017, 152, 11–23. [CrossRef]
Lyhne, I. Between policy-making and planning: SEA and strategic decision-making in the Danish energy sector. J. Environ. Assess.
Policy Manag. 2011, 13, 319–341. [CrossRef]
Avelino, F.; Wittmayer, J.M. Shifting power relations in sustainability transitions: A multi-actor perspective. J. Environ. Policy Plan.
2016, 18, 628–649. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2021, 13, 10551

48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.

58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.

20 of 20

Seddon, P.B.; Lewis, G.; Freeman, P.; Shanks, G. The case for viewing business models as abstractions of strategy. Commun. Assoc.
Inf. Syst. 2004, 13, 25. [CrossRef]
Vandevyvere, H. Positive Energy Districts Solution Booklet. 2020. Available online: https://cityxchange.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2020/12/1606985144968.pdf (accessed on 16 September 2021).
Wüstenhagen, R.; Boehnke, J. Business models for sustainable energy. Perspect. Radic. Change Sustain. Consum. Prod. 2006, 20, 253.
Gauthier, C.; Gilomen, B. Business models for sustainability: Energy efficiency in urban districts. Organ. Environ. 2016, 29,
124–144. [CrossRef]
Uspenskaia, D.; Specht, K.; Kondziella, H.; Bruckner, T. Challenges and Barriers for Net-Zero/Positive Energy Buildings and
Districts—Empirical Evidence from the Smart City Project SPARCS. Buildings 2021, 11, 78. [CrossRef]
Teece, D.J. Business Models, Business Strategy and Innovation. Long Range Plan. 2010, 43, 172–194. [CrossRef]
Osterwalder, A.; Pigneur, Y. Business Model Generation: A Handbook for Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers; Alexander
Osterwalder & Yves Pigneu: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2009.
d’Aprile, P.; Engel, H.; Helmcke, S.; Hieronimus, S.; Naucler, T.; Pinner, D.; van Gendt, G.; Walter, D.; Witteveen, M. How the
European Union Could Achieve Net-Zero Emissions at Net-Zero Cost; McKinsey & Company: Chicago, IL, USA, 2020.
Cramton, P. Electricity market design. Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 2017, 33, 589–612. [CrossRef]
Salom, J.; Tamm, M.; Andresen, I.; Cali, D.; Magyari, A.; Bukovszki, V.; Balasz, R.; Dorizas, P.; Toth, Z.; Mafe, C.; et al.
An Evaluation Framework for Sustainable Plus Energy Neighbourhoods: Moving Beyond the Traditional Building Energy
Assessment. Energies 2021, 14, 4314. [CrossRef]
Brange, L.; Englund, J.; Lauenburg, P. Prosumers in district heating networks—A Swedish case study. Appl. Energy 2016, 164,
492–500. [CrossRef]
Marino, C.; Nucara, A.; Panzera, M.; Pietrafesa, M. Towards the nearly zero and the plus energy building: Primary energy
balances and economic evaluations. Therm. Sci. Eng. Prog. 2019, 13, 100400. [CrossRef]
Hedman, Å.; Rehman, H.; Babaldon, A.; Bisello, A.; Albert-Seifried, V.; Zhang, X.; Guarino, F.; Grynning, S.; Eicker, U.; Neumann,
H.; et al. IEA EBC Annex83 positive energy districts. Buildings 2021, 11, 130. [CrossRef]
Wong, L.A.; Ramachandaramurthy, V.; Taylor, P.; Ekanayake, J.; Walker, S.; Padmanaban, S. Review on the optimal placement,
sizing and control of an energy storage system in the distribution network. J. Energy Storage 2019, 21, 489–504. [CrossRef]
Lund, H.; Østergaard, P.; Connolly, D.; Mathiesen, B. Smart energy and smart energy systems. Energy 2017, 137, 556–565.
[CrossRef]
European Commission. The Strategic Energy Technology Plan—At the Heart of Energy Research and Innovation in Europe; Communication from the European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 2018.
Moreno, A.G.; Velez, F.; Alpagut, B.; Hernandez, P.; Montalvillo, C.S. How to Achieve Positive Energy Districts for Sustainable
Cities: A Proposed Calculation Methodology. Sustainability 2021, 13, 710. [CrossRef]
Ala-Juusela, M.; Crosbie, T.; Hukkalainen, M. Defining and operationalising the concept of an energy positive neighbourhood.
Energy Convers. Manag. 2016, 125, 133–140. [CrossRef]
UNEP. District Energy in Cities: Unlocking the Potential of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy; United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP): Nairobi, Kenya, 2016.
Chen, Y.; Hua, H.; Wang, J.; Lund, P. Thermodynamic performance analysis and modified thermo-ecological cost optimization of
a hybrid district heating system considering energy levels. Energy 2021, 224, 120067. [CrossRef]
Laitinen, A.; Lindholm, O.; Hasan, A.; Reda, F.; Hedman, A. A techno-economic analysis of an optimal self-sufficient district.
Energy Convers. Manag. 2021, 236, 114041. [CrossRef]
Rae, C.; Kerr, S.; Maroto-Valer, M.M. Upscaling smart local energy systems: A review of technical barriers. Renew. Sustain. Energy
Rev. 2020, 131, 110020. [CrossRef]
Shnapp, S.; Paci, D.; Bertoldi, P. Enabling Positive Energy Districts Across Europe: Energy Efficiency Couples Renewable Energy;
Publication Office of the European Union: Luxembourg, 2020.
ISO 52000-1, 52000–52001: 2017 Energy Performance of Buildings—Overarching EPB Assessment—Part 1: General Framework and
Procedures; ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2017.
Egger, C.; Gignac, M. The Energy Efficiency Watch Survey Report. 2020. Available online: http://www.energy-efficiency-watch.
org/media/publications/EEW4-survey-report.pdf (accessed on 16 September 2021).
Hargreaves, A.; Cheng, V.; Deshmukh, S.; Leach, M.; Steemers, K. Forecasting how residential urban form affects the regional
carbon savings and costs of retrofitting and decentralized energy supply. Appl. Energy 2017, 186, 549–561. [CrossRef]
JPI Urban Europe and SET-Plan 3.2. White Paper on Reference Framework for Positive Energy Districts and Neighbourhoods;
Key Lessons from National Consultations. 2020. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/
White-Paper-PED-Framework-Definition-2020323-final.pdf (accessed on 16 September 2021).

