International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019 95–106

RESEARCH and EXPERIMENTATION

Solutions and services for smart sustainable districts: innovative Key
Performance Indicators to support transition
Carola Clemente*a, Paolo Civierob and Marilisa Celluralea
aSapienza University of Rome, PDTA Department – Via Flaminia 72, 00196 Roma (IT)
b IREC Catalonia Institute for Energy Research, Jardins de les Dones de Negre, 1, 08930 Sant Adrià de Besòs, Barcelona (Spain)
ABSTRACT

Keywords:

The European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET Plan) supports the Energy Union’s
policies by setting the strategies for the European Union energy sector. In 2018, the
Implementation Plan traced the pathway in planning, deployment and replication of 100 Positive
Energy Districts (PED) by 2025. This article presents innovative research on models,
methodologies planning tools and technology solutions for the short-medium term implementation
of PEDs.

Positive Energy Districts;
Transitions and Dilemmas;
Key Performance Indicators;
Smart Cities and Communities solutions

The approach and methodology behind the research is based on an operational framework set up
to identify gaps and sharing for urban services’ implementation and to support life improvements
for citizens, consumers, and prosumers.

URL: http://doi.org/10.5278/ijsepm.3350

The main output of this research report is a framework to facilitate a synthetic evaluation of the
positioning and improvement of each smart city solution considered in the study. These are
referring to engagement phase (planning, design, construction, management) and engagement
scale (functional unit, building, blocks of building, infrastructures, environment). Furthermore,
the framework improves the identification of strategies and stakeholders’ commitment to promote
Smart Urban District or PEDs transition.
This research contribution stems from the project SCC solutions for Positive Energy Districts
– Research of Electric System/Annual Implementation Plan 2018/41 between Sapienza University
of Rome and ENEA Energy Technology Dept. – Sustainable Energy Network. The broader aim
of that project has been to design a set of strategies to facilitate the transition of the built
environment towards e.g. Smart Energy Districts.

1. ntroduction
In in the context of a decade of deep economic suffering,
the transition from the EU Horizon 2020 to the EU
Horizon Europe programme marks an important landmark in analysis and evaluation about the climate and
energy policies. The energy issue, no longer confined to
the resource-consumption binomial, has been recognized
by the international scientific community [1–5] as a pervasive issue, linked to the economy of scale, ­information,

interoperability of systems, and the quality of citizens’
behaviour. Over the last ten years, the European Energy
Research Alliance (EERA) through the Joint Programme
Initiatives (JPI) has provided the scientific and operational basis to realise the full potential of energy efficiency in urban areas [6].
The rapid technological advancement, especially in
the big data management and IoT field, supported the
commitment of the JPI Urban Europe in getting ahead

*Corresponding author - e-mail: marilisa.cellurale@uniroma1.it

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

95

Solutions and services for smart sustainable districts: innovative Key Performance Indicators to support transition

Acknowledgement of value
The added value of the research “SCC solutions for positive Energy District – RdS/PAR2018/041” is the setting up of a framework which support synthetic evaluation and facilitate public officers within a Municipality
to recognize which alternatives would support the transition to PEDs according to Italian rules and regulation.
The idea is that this framework could facilitate their deployment and replication to each local context as for
instance, Taranto.
I believe that PEDs must be not only efficient from the energetic point of view, but also they must integrate
functional, technological and social aspects, with an overall improvement of services for citizens to support
transition towards urban sustainability.
That is why the main outputs and results of the research project could facilitate Municipal Council
Representatives in the comprehension and laying out of strategies which can be effective to enable urban
regeneration. This is the main objective for Taranto City where it is necessary to develop an integrative
approach which includes technological, spatial, regulatory, financial, environmental, social and economic perspective driven by City in cooperation with industry and investors, research and citizen organization.
Ubaldo Occhinegro , Council Representative for Urban Planning - Construction, Mobility and Strategic
Plans, Municipality of Taranto, Italy
“a purely techno-centric vision that reduced smartness
to a driver for the economic development of those companies that in various way operate in the ICT” [7].
In 2018, the Implementation Plan traced the pathway
in planning, deployment and replication of 100 Positive
Energy Districts (PEDs) by 2025, defined as follows:
“PEDs require interaction and integration between
buildings, the users and the regional energy, mobility
and ICT systems, as well as an integrative approach
including technology, spatial, regulatory, financial legal,
social and economic perspectives. Ideally, PEDs will be
developed in an open innovation framework, driven by
cities in cooperation with industry and investors,
research and citizen organisations” [8].
The research project “SCC solutions for positive
Energy District –– Research of Electric System (RdS)/
Annual Implementation Plan (PAR) 2018/41” - a collaboration between Sapienza University of Rome PDTA
and ENEA Energy Technology Department Sustainable
Energy Network - moves from vision and understanding
highlighted in the SET Plan Implementation Plan Action
3.2 Smart Cities, which aims to support the planning,
deployment and replication of 100 Positive Energy
District by 2025 for a sustainable urbanization.
The research project aims to create a support to facilitate cities towards a positive energy transition identifying properties of PED, priorities for planning/deployment
of PED and an innovative Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs) system to promote transition.

96

The main outcomes could be based on:
•
PED conceptual framing as a transition from
Smart Urban District model highlighting gaps
and commonalities;
•
PED conceptual framing according to “new”
urban dilemmas able to highlight which Smart
Cities and Communities (SCC) solutions better
allow the transition towards PED;
•
an innovative framework and KPIs system for
identifying SCC solutions enabling transition
towards PED.
The research project is therefore focused on the systematization (a) of the main implementation domains for
PED transition, (b) the products and solutions according
to the different dilemmas in PED, (c) the scales and
phases, and (d) the relevant stakeholders for planning
and deployment of PED supporting development of a set
of SCC solutions.
The final result is a framework and an innovative KPI
evaluation system to identify for each SCC solution
(technologies, sensors, products, apps, ICT, etc.) the
level of technology readiness level(TRL), the stakeholder type which is necessary to involve to support
planning and deployment of SCC solutions as well as the
engagement phase (planning, design, construction and
management) and the engagement scale (functional unit,
building, blocks of building, infrastructure, environment). The framework allows to identify gaps and commonalities for implementing urban services which

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Carola Clemente, Paolo Civiero and Marilisa Cellurale

support a high quality of life for the consumers/­
It is therefore a question of constructing a scalable
prosumers.
methodological and operational framework, aimed at
An added value of the research project is an innovaresponding to two orders of preliminary considerations,
tive way to create a repertoire of technological solutions,
referred to the national level (Italian case study):
which includes a defined quantity of devices, products
1. the structural characteristics of Italian urban
and tools within a wide range of solutions available on
realities [9] qualify the dilemmas with respect to
the market and/or ready for the test-bed phase as well as
the consistency of the built heritage and to the
a KPI metrics to identify engagement scale and engagedimensional and evolutionary parameter of the
ment phase as well as the potential stakeholders to
urban application field;
involve in.
2. to correspond, where useful, to the objectives of
SET - Plan on Action 3.2, it is necessary to set
up the instrumental framework for implementing
2. Smart Urban District priorities and dilemmas
and governing the transition to PEDs for
facilitating PED transition.
progressive steps of immediate implementation.
This research project follows the previous one, namely
According to this, a logical (computer) tool has been
“RdS/PAR2017/075” which aim was underline the techdesigned for the recognition and systematization of the
nological solutions already available on the market to
SCC resources and solutions already operational and
support the transition towards Smart Urban District and
implementable within the Smart Urban District.
highlighted that it is necessary to integrate the regulated
In the next step, there are two conceptual evolutions
model of city transformation - for discrete stadiums and
able to orientate the transition to the PED.
sectors as prescribed by the regulatory framework†The first concerns the measurement of the effectivewith an holistic approach to stimulate the optimization
ness of the solutions identified: we intend to measure the
of resources through the application of SCC solutions,
smart quality not only with reference to the objective
thus promoting a high interoperability degree. The reaperformance indicators but based on the field of applicasoning refinement and the tools developed within the
tion, then interoperability with other solutions, at differSmart Urban District, both on a technical and epistemoent scales; the second concerns degree of gain that the
logical level, require a continuous evaluation, revision
combination itself generates, referred to the sum of the
and implementation of the adopted solutions.
KPIs of the individual instruments. In other words, measuring quality on applications means evaluating the
effectiveness of an interoperable system, such as the
†	
We are referring to the European and national regulatory framework for
energy, which has the strength of defining a minimum level of energy
ratio between the sum of the expected (project) perforperformance of built environment but does not promote an integrated
mance of a solution and the plus value (positive KPI)
vision regarding the optimization of energy systems

Table 1: Analysis Model for implementation of the SCC solutions in areas of Urban Dilemmas

Areas
1. Safety &
Security,
2. Health,
3. Education,
4. Mobility,
5. Energy,
6. Water,
7. Waste,
8. Economic
development,
Housing and
Community.

Key Tools/
Technologies
answer in areas
Ref. to all Areas
(1,2,3, …)

Implementation
domains
1. Technologies in
built environment
2. Energy supply
system,
3. Water disposal
system,
4. Waste disposal
system,
5. Mobility system,
6. Public space,
7. Regulatory
framework.

Engagement phase
1. Planning,
2. Design,
3. Construction,
4. Management.

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Engagement scale

Stakeholder

1. Functional unit,
2. Building,
3. Block of buildings,
4. Infrastructures
(material/
immaterial),
5. Environment
(physical/social).

1. Government,
2. R&I,
3. Financial/Funding,
4. Analyst, IT project
and Big Data,
5. BPM,
6. Urban Services,
7. Real Estate,
8. Design/ Construction,
9. Social/Civil Society,
10. eCommerce.

97

Solutions and services for smart sustainable districts: innovative Key Performance Indicators to support transition

Table 2: SCC Solutions areas of Urban Dilemmas. Implementation of solutions/services according to [11,12]
Key tools/technologies answer in areas
Areas

Class of solutions

Solutions

1

Safety & Security

real time crime mapping
smart surveillance
body worn cameras
disaster early warning systems
predictive policing
emergency response optimization
crowd management
building security and safety system
personal alert applications
gunshot detection
data driven building inspections

2

Health

telemedicine
online care search and scheduling
real time air quality information
infectious disease surveillance
lifestyles wearables
remote monitoring applications and medication adherence tools
data based population health interventions
first aid alerts
integrated patient flow management system

3

Education

e-learning platform
augmented reality tools
building automation simulator
Education&Training platforms
energy management awareness
real time behavioral impact
personalized education applications
open data/data management platform

4

Mobility

98

sharing/
e-hailing/
autonomous driving

private e-hailing
bike sharing
car sharing
autonomous vehicle
pooled e-hailing
demand-based micro transit
traffic management and data services
real time road navigation

traffic management and
data sharing

real time road navigation
integrated multimodal info
digital payment in public transit
intelligent traffic signals and vehicle preemption
real time public transit info
smart parking
predictive maintenance of transit infrastructure
congestion pricing

urban cargo

smart parcel lockers
parcel load pooling and urban consolidation centers

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Carola Clemente, Paolo Civiero and Marilisa Cellurale

Table 2: SCC Solutions areas of Urban Dilemmas. Implementation of solutions/services according to [11,12]
Key tools/technologies answer in areas
Areas

Class of solutions

Solutions

5

Energy

distribution automation system
dynamic electricity pricing
building energy consumption tracking
smart streetlights
building automation systems
building energy automation systems

6

Water

leakage detection and control
water consumption tracking
water quality monitoring
smart irrigation

7

Waste

waste collection route optimization
digital tracking and payment for waste disposal

8

Economic
Development
Housing and
Community

local connection platforms
peer to peer accommodation platforms
digital administrative citizen services
local civic engagement application
local e-career center
online retraining programmes

generated by an optimized combination of solutions
different, in response to urban dilemmas‡, as it will be
explained later in this article.
3. Transition towards Positive Energy Districts:
dilemmas and solutions
The transition to an energy surplus goes through the
domains already identified for the Smart Urban District,
which are specified in urban dilemmas to which SCC
technologies and solutions respond. The table below
shows the correspondences between the urban domains
involved in the transformation, identified by the World
Economic Forum [10] and the eight transition contexts,
identified as areas for defining “dilemmas” [11].
In the operative matrix the dilemmas categorize the
relative answers in terms of technologies.
In accordance with the ontology drawn by the SET
Plan ACTION 3.2, the solutions to the dilemmas are
implementable and not unambiguous. A first survey
‡ The contents of the document, therefore, adhere to the purposes of Module
4 - Replication and Mainstreaming of PED, specifically the “Activity No 4
- Identify analyze policies mixes and initiatives for PED transition, and
enable to transfer from research into practice, as well as co-creation with
industry and city partners” programmed in the implementation of SETPlan ACTION.

c­ onducted by McKinsey & Company [12] was adopted
as a coherent trace to the previously stated objectives,
susceptible of subsequent implementations dictated by
the expression of future urban dilemmas and consequent
technical responses of research and innovation.
Key Tools & Technologies become the enabling factors that, conveniently combined with business models
and system stakeholders, allow the development of SCC
solutions which facilitate transition towards PED [8].
4. Implementation domain
Taking into account the formulation of the SET Plan
ACTION 3.2 Implementation Plan, the Positive Energy
District should involve the optimization of three
­dimensions:
•
Energy efficiency in buildings;
•
Energy flexibility within the districts;
•
Supply, at the regional or local level, of energy
from renewable sources.
The actions have an impact on urban physiology, recognized in six classes of physical components and one of a
disciplinary nature (Table 3).
Furthermore, the listed classes constitute domains of
systems and relationships in which the dilemmas originate. The effectiveness of the combined and integrated
application of SCC solutions is linked to the ability to

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

99

Solutions and services for smart sustainable districts: innovative Key Performance Indicators to support transition

Table 3: Implementation domains of the SCC solutions
Implementation domains of key tools/technologies answer in areas
Technologies in Built Environment

Building

Energy
Supply
System

Water
Disposal
System

Waste
Disposal
System

Mobility
System

Public
Space

Regulatory
Framework

Infrastructures
Material
Infrastructures

Immaterial
Infrastructures

ST
stakeholders

engagement phase

Government Stakeholders (G)
Research & Innovation Stakeholders (R&I)

management D

Financial/Funding Stakeholders (FF)
Analyst, IT project and Big Data Stakeholders (IT)

construction C

BPM Stakeholders (PM)
Urban Services Stakeholders (US)

design B

Real Estate Stakeholders (RE)
Design/Construction Stakeholders (DC)
Social/Civil Society Stakeholders (S)

planning A

eCommerce Stakeholders (eC)
e
environment
(social/physical)

d
infrastructures
(material/immaterial)

c
block of buildings

b
building

functional unit

a

engagement scale

ES
Eph

Figure 1: On the left side, the dimensions of the transformation and implementation of the SCC solutions: engagement phase/scale with
stakeholders. On the right, Logical framework applied to the “motion sensor” technology for the evaluation of its effectiveness and potential

recognize the connections between domains, the subjects involved in proposing and discussing dilemmas
and designing, therefore, the implementation of systems and components. The synoptic framework qualifies as a tool for the positioning of existing ICT
products, for the identification of gaps, for the possible
development of unpublished fields of application or for
the enhancement of existing solutions. In fact, it is
believed that the first transition to PEDs is knowledge
and organization of existing resources, a sort of accelerator and generator of plus-valence on what we already
have in our hands.
5. Transitions towards PED: step towards and
engagement
As already mentioned, we consider the physical dimension of urban reality as an indispensable factor in the
evaluation of solutions and potential value ­generation.

100

For this reason, a further coordination effort is required
for positioning different solutions within the matrix.
The left side of Figure 1 shows the dimensions of the
transformation in terms of time as phases - that characterize the transformation processes of the built environment - and dimension of the action triggered by the
solution or the integrated solution system in the relative
implementation domain, from the functional unit, in
which the individual prosumer acts, to the environmental dimension, as the sphere of physical and social relations, to which the highest degree of complexity is
attributed. The third dimension, the system stakeholders,
links the effectiveness of the tools themselves to the
ability of the actors of the supply chain to play the role
of accelerators (RdS / PAR2016 / 033) of the implementation of SCC solutions and to express the potentials of
use unpublished.
On the right side, Figure 1 shows, through a three-­
dimensional representation, the functioning of the

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Carola Clemente, Paolo Civiero and Marilisa Cellurale

l­ogical framework applied to the “motion sensor” technology, described in detail below.
The impact of the adoption of the motion sensor is not
assessed in itself but with respect to its ability to affect
the different scales of the urban environment and to
involve stakeholders in the interaction with technology.
Thanks to the given framework, the ability of the
stakeholders to activate and promote the implementation
in the two engagement dimensions (phase and scale) is
able to shape differently the specific weight of the SCC
solution. It appears clear that overlap and consolidation
of stakeholder interests accelerate and amplify the effectiveness of the process.
6. Analysis of SSC solutions and specific
implementations towards energy services to
support PED.
Market demand analysis as well as experimentation of
innovative products/ solutions in the RD&I areas (i.e.:
ICT., robotics and industrial automation) could highlight
possible ingenious scenarios in the perspective of the
Smart City to come. In this perspective, PEDs are an
integral part of this process, in line with the SET-Plan
ACTION n.3.2, in line with the strategies of sustainability and energy efficiency in the environment built at
different scales (from the building to the district, to
urban space), according to synergistic actions defined
among the Member States of the European Union.
Among the solutions deriving for RD&I actions, integrated solutions are potentially the most useful for the
diffusion of PEDs, thanks to the interoperability that is
established between technologies, infrastructural networks and systems as well as the improved ability to
manage a large amount of data [13-16]: the dialogue
among systems, technologies and components allows
the transition from single architectures to an ecosystem
which enable new services that interact each other in a
collaborative approach, favoring the automatic interaction between applications and their reuse.
Thanks to interoperability it is possible to share and
use information promptly, and thus overcome the traditional subdivision into vertical silos to achieve communication between horizontal silos. The classification of
solutions according to certain areas of interest is therefore useful for defining the field of action of each individual solution and the level of technological innovation
achieved, in order to promote an adequate integration
between energy and urban services through the inclusion

of additional services (not only energy services) useful
to promote a higher level of quality of life for the citizen,
consumer and prosumers.
By processing the data, it is therefore possible to
implement software applications capable of carrying out
specific functions and activating potential services aimed
at certain user categories, according to specific thresholds set by the system. The communication of data and
information is made possible to the end user and accessible to service providers, through the use of mobile
devices (SD - Smart Devices – e.g. smartphones, tablets
and other dedicated systems): this process of transmission of information and communication with end users
and stakeholders makes it possible to create new management tools for buildings and the city and to define
new scenarios for the use of the built environment condition.
According to the given premises it is possible to distinguish: devices and products, communication interfaces, energy management platforms and urban planning,
web tools and interactive apps, whose purpose - as mentioned - is on the one hand improving the performance
of the built system and, on the other, to raise the quality
of life of the person, enabling a range of innovative services to the citizen, according to specific areas of action
and intervention.
Thanks to the research it has been possible to create
an analysis tool for the identification of potential products which need to be implemented for PED transition,
according to the Italian situation and with respect to
certain domains of interest, defining priorities and level
of TRL.
Through the systematization of information, it is
therefore possible to identify areas, products, stakeholders and the relative level of TRL maturity achieved by
each solution, in order to verify the effective implementation and applicability to the national context.
The research activity was therefore aimed at identifying the specific functions of the products and the type of
service that they are able to provide, with reference to
the scope of the main “dilemmas” previously defined
(Economic development housing and community;
Health, Mobility, Safety & Security, Waste, Water) as
determined in SET-Plan ACTION n.3.2 and in the
framework of the respective “domains” of the implementation, in order to recognize gaps to solve in the
future, according specific areas and lines of action .
The following type of solutions has been defined
(A - Actuator, B - Bus connectivity, G - Gateway,

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

101

Solutions and services for smart sustainable districts: innovative Key Performance Indicators to support transition

SD - Smart Device, SM - Smart Meter, SO - Smart
Object, SS - Smart Sensor (in the case of technologies
and devices); IC - Communication Interfaces, IP Interactive Platforms (apps), UP - Urban energy management platforms) as well as functioning and
performance (i.e.: systems activation, communication
with the end user and system stakeholders, control, monitoring, collection and transmission of info or services).
The specific functionalities, the quantity and quality
of the parameters that the individual solutions are able to
manage or the type of service they are able to supply in
an integrated way have also been determined - AAL Assisted Living, COM - Comfort, NRG - Energy, SAE
- Safety & Security. While Assisted Living’s solutions
(AAL - Ambient Assisted Living) are mainly aimed at
fragile user categories - such as disabled or elderly
people - the other devices refer to generic users, is able
to offer diversified services, such as control of the environmental conditions to guarantee the wellbeing of the
occupants (COM - Comfort), or adequate safety conditions (SAE - Safety & Security) to ensure the safety of
the users with respect to external agents or the occurrence of dangerous situations for the person , the management of energy consumption (NRG - Energy) aimed
to reduce polluting emissions and the consequent economic savings.
It is indeed possible that the same device is able to
enable multiple services and can be effective for different and multiple levels of user satisfaction, embracing
distinct features or parameters.
In order to verify solutions interoperability, the communication protocol (e.g. wireless or wired) to which the
individual solutions refer has been identified as well as
location in the physical space (i.e. indoor or outdoor)
according to the radius of action that they are able to
intercept.
The table presented in this article are part of a selected
repertoire of technological solutions, in which a defined
quantity of devices, products and tools is included
within a wide range of solutions available on the market
and/or being tested.
The repertoire of solutions is a sort of catalogue,
potentially useful in the project’s elaboration phases
which could be used as a device for sharing knowledge
on these systems. These solutions, despite being widely
used in many international contexts, do not yet enjoy
regulatory, performance and appropriate use, such as its
immediate application on a national scale. The radial
graph allows to determine the level of technological
progress achieved according to the TRL levels defined.

102

Thanks to the Figures 2 and 3 it possible to identify gaps
and missing solutions for the provision of specific services and with a view to achieving higher levels of quality of life for the citizen, consumer/prosumers, within
the framework of the “dilemmas” previously established.
7. Conclusion
This paper highlights strengths and weaknesses for the
transition towards PED through the “dilemmas”
approach.
According to the actual state of art in SCC solutions,
it has been possible to identify the area which the single
solution/product is able to support, as well as priorities
and research perspectives.
The consequent framework which derives is a tool to
guide, verify and assess the TRL level (achieved / objective / priority) for each single technology or group of
technologies, devices, products, apps and integrated
intelligent systems. It is also possible to implement areas
for R&DI on solutions able to provide urban services to
support PED transition. The given flexible model is
effective to recognize functionality and criticism for
each solution, and to position research and products in
the market as well as stakeholders related to the specific
solution.
The table for product/solution illustrated in the article
represents a small selection of a wider repertoire, which
includes a defined quantity of devices, products and
tools within a wide range of solutions available on the
market and/or being tested.
The repertoire of solutions is a sort of catalogue,
potentially useful in the definition phases of SCC
solutions. The information and the radial chart that
accompanies each data sheet make it possible to
determine the incidence and level of integration for
each solution having in mind the 4 dilemmas and the
specific areas for urban dilemmas, as well as the technological progress achieved according to the TRL
levels.
This representation also makes it possible to identify
any gaps and missing solutions for the provision of specific services and with a view to achieving higher levels
of quality of life for the citizen / user, within the framework of the “dilemmas” previously established.
Acknowledgement
This article was invited and accepted for publication in
the EERA Joint Programme on Smart Cities’ Special

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Carola Clemente, Paolo Civiero and Marilisa Cellurale

Figure 2: Motion Sensor datasheet

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

103

Solutions and services for smart sustainable districts: innovative Key Performance Indicators to support transition

Figure 3: App Your Wellness (Great Northern Haven) datasheet

104

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

Carola Clemente, Paolo Civiero and Marilisa Cellurale

issue on Tools, technologies and systems integration for
the Smart and Sustainable Cities to come [16].
References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

Good N, Martinez Cesena EA, Mancarella P. Ten questions
concerning smart districts. Building and Environment (118)
(2017): 362-376. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2017.03.037
Yan D, Hong T, Dong B, Mahdavi A, D’Oca S, Gaetani I, Feng
X. IEA EBC Annex 66: Definition and simulation of occupant
behavior in buildings. Energy and Buildings 156 (2017): 258270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.09.084
Frederiks ER, Stenner K, Hobman EV. Household energy use:
Applying behavioural economics to understand consumer
decision-making and behaviour. Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews (41) (2015) pages 1385-1394. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.09.026
Tianshu W, Zhu Q, Yu N. Proactive demand participation of
smart buildings in smart grid. IEEE Transactions on Computers 65
(5) (2015): 1392-1406. https://doi.org/10.1109/TC.2015.2495244
Palensky P, Dietmar D. Demand side management: Demand
response, intelligent energy systems, and smart loads. IEEE
transactions on industrial informatics 7 (3) (2011) pages 381388. https://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2011.2158841
SCIENTIFIC BOARD FOR JPSC SPECIAL ISSUE, Joint
Programme on Smart Cities. EERA Joint Programme on Smart
Cities: storyline, facts and figures. TECHNE - Journal of
Technology for Architecture and Environment, [S.l.] (1) (2018)
pages 16-25 https://doi.org/10.13128/Techne-23566
Antonini E, Mussinelli E. Toward the smart city and beyond.
TECHNE-Journal of Technology for Architecture and
Environment, [S.l.] (1) (2018), pages. 26-27. https://doi:10.13128/
Techne-23567.
SET-Plan ACTION n°3.2 Implementation Plan. Europe to
become a global role model in integrated, innovative solutions
for the planning, deployment, and replication of Positive
Energy Districts. (2018). Available online at:https://setis.ec.
europa.eu/system/files/setplan_smartcities_implementationplan.pdf [Accessed on 01 Sept 2019].

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

Pinna R, Costanzo E, Romano S. (2018). Pathways to
ZEED. TECHNE-Journal of Technology for Architecture and
Environment, (1), pages 40-44. http://dx.doi.org/10.13128/
Techne-22736
World Economic Forum (2015). Inspiring Future Cities &
Urban Services. Shaping the Future of Urban Development &
Services Initiative, Global Survey on Urban Services. Available
online at: http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_UrbanServices.pdf [Accessed on 01 Sept 2019].
JPI Urban Europe. Strategic Research and Innovation Agenda
2.0. Full Draft. (2018) Available online at https://jpiurbaneurope.eu/about/sria/
McKinsey Global Institute (2018). Smart Cities: digital
solutions for a more livable future. Available online at: https://
www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/capital%20
projects%20and%20infrastructure/our%20insights/smart%20
cities%20digital%20solutions%20for%20a%20more%20
livable%20future/mgi-smart-cities-full-report.ashx [Accessed
on 01 Sept 2019].
Ahlgren B, Hidell M, Ngai EC. Internet of things for smart
cities: Interoperability and open data. IEEE Internet Computing
20 (6) (2016). pages 52-56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIC.
2016.124
Integrated and Replicable Solutions for Co-Creation in
Sustainable Cities. Available online at https://irissmartcities.eu/
content/5-iris-transition-tracks [Accessed on 01 Sept 2019].
Maestosi PC, Civiero P, Romano S, Botticelli M. Smart home
network for smart social housing: A potential to boost the
dignity of mankind. InProceedings of the 42th IAHS World
Congress The Housing for the Dignity of Mankind, Naples,
Italy 2018 Apr (pp. 10-13). Available online at http://sue.enea.
i t / w p - c o n t e n t / u p l o a d s / 2 0 1 7 / 1 1 / p a p e r- I A H S 2 0 1 8 _ ID014_20180215-ottimizzato.pdf [Accessed on 01 Sept 2019].
Østergaard PA, Maestosi PC. Tools, technologies and systems
integration for the Smart and Sustainable Cities to come. Int
J Sustain Energy Plan Manag 2019;24 2019. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5278/ijsepm.3450

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 24 2019

105

