International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022 91–106

Stakeholder management in PED projects: challenges and
management model
Juha-Antti Rankinena*, Sara Lakkalaa, Harri Haapasaloa and Sari Hirvonen-Kantolab
a Industrial Engineering and Management, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 4300, 90014 Oulu, Finland
b Oulu School of Architecture, University of Oulu, 90014 Oulu, Finland
ABSTRACT

Keywords

The importance of stakeholder analysis and stakeholder management is magnified as project
complexity increases. Complex projects can be characterized by uncertainties arising from
emerging technologies and the involvement of various types of stakeholders and their interests.
Positive Energy District (PED) projects are an example of such undertaking, coupling novel
energy solutions with distinct stakeholders and their diverse positions, claims, and requirements
pertaining to the project. In this study, our objective is to provide a stakeholder management
framework for future PED projects. The qualitative case study follows the theory elaboration
methodology and aims to formulate a conceptual stakeholder management framework for PED
projects. Thus, our contribution focuses on expanding the domain of project stakeholder
management by characterizing and validating it in a new, time-relevant project context.

Positive Energy District;
Inter-organizational collaboration;
Project stakeholder management.

1. Introduction
A structural shift from an energy system that is based on
finite energy sources, such as fossil fuels, toward a
system that uses more renewable energy sources is considered “energy transition.” Historically, energy systems
have been relatively centralized, that is, energy has been
centrally produced in large power plants, transmitted
into cities, and then distributed among the various consumers. Today, along with energy transition, energy
systems are decentralizing and decarbonizing, which
have given rise to a strong interest in local communities
generating and supplying energy [1, 2]. To achieve the
European energy and climate targets and ensure the
attainment of the long-term vision for energy transition,
urban development must move from individual building
solutions towards Positive Energy Districts (PEDs) or
other similar concepts [3]. A PED is a platform that consists of “buildings that actively manage the energy flow

http://doi.org/10.54337/ijsepm.6979

between them and the broader energy (electricity, heating, and cooling) and mobility systems by making optimal use of advanced materials, local renewables, storage,
demand response, electric vehicle smart-charging and
ICT” [4].
As such, novel technological solutions and the relationships between the buildings and the entities residing
in the district are being integrated [5]. Locally, the technological execution of an innovative PED solution
requires intensive expertise from energy system designers and energy solution providers. Notably, besides
­technological novelty, a PED project entails challenges
arising from the complicatedness of the stakeholders
involved. As a district development undertaking, a PED
involves multiple municipality agencies concerned with
the planning, development, and governance of city districts. The other involved parties are energy system
designers, contractors, housing companies, business

*Corresponding author – e-mail: juha-antti.rankinen@oulu.fi

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 33 2022

91

Stakeholder management in PED projects: challenges and management model

owners, customers, and local residents in the area that
hitherto might not have had relations with each other.
As PEDs are planned and implemented as projects,
and due to the previously highlighted technological and
relational complexities, project management serves as a
critical step toward achieving desirable outcomes. As
complexity heightens, the significance of project stakeholder management concurrently increases [6].
Therefore, understanding the stakeholder environment
and efficiently managing it would boost the chances of
success [7]. With the intent to replicate to 100 cities by
2025 [8], the success of early districts is key to catering
to replications and to avoiding the emergence of opposition. The aforementioned premises serve as the principal
motivations for this research.
This study aims to explore stakeholder management
in the context of PED projects and to develop new
knowledge on how the project stakeholders of a PED
project should be catered to. The goal is to contribute to
the existing body of project stakeholder research and to
seek practical implications for future PED projects and
other similar endeavors. To address these research
objectives, the following research questions were formulated.
RQ1: How should stakeholders be managed in complex project settings?
RQ2: What are the main challenges encountered in
PED projects?
RQ3: What are the main steps for stakeholder management in PED projects?
This paper is organized as follows. We begin with a
literature review that clarifies stakeholder management
activities, and then we synthesize a generic framework
for project stakeholder management, thus addressing the
first research question. Next, we present our methodology for the empirical case research. We then provide
descriptions for two parallel case projects in the same
PED setting. Thereafter, key challenges are identified
and described, thereby answering the second research
question. Finally, based on both prior literature and the
identified challenges, we present the main steps for
stakeholder management in PED projects, and end with
the discussion and conclusions.
2. Project stakeholder approach
Stakeholder management is one of the key areas of project management [9] whose central purpose is to enable
and enhance management’s capabilities in making

92

informed strategic and operative decisions that cater to
stakeholders’ interests and expectations [10, 11].
Notably, the key issue in this domain arises from the
identification and recognition of different stakeholders.
Therefore, understanding the convoluted stakeholder
environments of complex projects is crucial to attain
success [7].
The term “stakeholder” has been given several definitions in project management literature. One of the
pre-eminent definitions is by Freeman [12], who stated
that stakeholders include all organizations or individuals
that can affect or be affected by the project. Narrower
definitions highlight the nature of interest or claim that a
stakeholder has on a project [13]. However, inclusions
that are too narrow may result in some stakeholders
being disregarded and their potential claims being overlooked [14]. Remarkably, in practice, the adoption of a
wide array of definitions can result in near infinite stakeholders, resulting in additional challenges. In addition to
stakeholder definitions, project management scholars
have created various categorizations for stakeholders.
One of the widely utilized classifications separates internal and external stakeholders. Internal stakeholders are
formal members of the project group and, thus, are usually aligned with the project objectives [15]. By contrast,
external stakeholders are not formal participants to the
project, but they can affect or be affected by the project’s
achievements and, hence, have vested interest in the
project [16].
2.1. Stakeholder prioritization
Not all stakeholders deserve the same effort or endowment. Limited project resources make managing all
stakeholders equally a problematic and unfavorable task
[17]. The project entity and the management should
focus attention where it is essential and prioritize those
who have ultimate influence over the project. The stakeholder salience framework [18] enables this prioritization by classifying and ranking various stakeholder
types according to their power, legitimacy, and urgency.
Power is a stakeholder’s ability to bring about outcomes
it desires [19]. Legitimacy is a stakeholder’s capacity to
make sound claims perceived as desirable and appropriate within the socially constructed system of norms,
values, and beliefs [18]. Urgency is the dynamism of a
stakeholder or the ability to call immediate actions for
its claims [18]. Depending on the possession and combination of these attributes, a typology for stakeholders
can be formed. Stakeholders possessing all three are

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

Juha-Antti Rankinen, Sara Lakkala, Harri Haapasalo and Sari Hirvonen-Kantola

Figure 1: Stakeholder assessment matrix [21]

recognized as definitive stakeholders, whilst those with
no or minimal number of attributes are considered least
important for management and decision-making.
Salience can vary during a project’s duration [18],
implying that the hierarchical structure and prioritization
can develop as the project moves forward.
Olander [20] expanded stakeholder characterization
by considering the impact level, probability to impact,
and positioning toward the project, together with the
saliency attributes, thereby fostering a more comprehensive stakeholder analysis. Aapaoja and Haapasalo [21]
further conceptualized Olander’s approach into a stakeholder assessment matrix that categorizes stakeholders
into different groups according to their salience and
probability to impact or ability to contribute. The proposed framework conceptualizes the influence of stakeholders and helps in allocating resources where they are
most appropriate.
2.2. Integration and early involvement
Generally, construction projects suffer from poor performance that manifests as time and cost overruns that are
partially caused by the inability of project participants to
work together effectively [22, 23]. Integration aims to
facilitate inter-organizational collaboration which, in a
project environment, can be regarded as a process
whereby different organizations are linked together to
work collaboratively toward the common objectives of

the project [24]. Integration aids in aligning the objectives
of various subprojects and supports the pursuit of common
goals [25] rather than focusing on sub-optimization [26].
One of the key activities to empower inter-organizational integration is the early involvement of relevant
actors. This refers to the inclusion of stakeholders in the
project from the earliest moments to altogether formulate the project objectives and determine the means by
which these objectives will be reached [27]. The opportunities to influence project success are at their highest
during the early stages of the project [28]. Late revisions
are usually more complicated to implement and the
associated costs are much higher [29]. Furthermore,
unique or complex projects often require the collaborations of multiple private and public organizations in the
development of the project and end-product. Therefore,
the early involvement of reasonable stakeholders enables
uniting the competencies of the project organization and
choosing better solutions for the customer to ultimately
deliver more value [30].
Instituting integration and initiating early involvement
may entail a multitude of challenges, including contractual complexity, lack of prior experience in collaborative
project environments, and challenges to leadership in the
form of deficient team-building efforts [31]. Project participants are often reluctant to invest in early project
stages where uncertainties are at the h­ ighest level [32].
Resistance to cultural change prevails as the biggest

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

93

Stakeholder management in PED projects: challenges and management model

Figure 2: Generic stakeholder management model for complex project settings

b­ arrier to implementing and adopting early involvement,
and the major cause of this resistance arises from a lack
of understanding the concept and its benefits [33].
2.3. Stakeholder engagement
Stakeholder engagement has become the key concept
describing how organizations practice the stakeholder
theory [34]. While many definitions and descriptions
exist, perhaps the most widely used is the one by
Greenwood [35], which describes stakeholder engagement as practices that the organization undertakes to
involve stakeholders with organizational activities in a
positive manner. Stakeholder engagement helps the stakeholder network achieve a higher-quality collaboration,
thereby increasing the economic sustainability of the
project [36]. As the complexity of the project environment
increases, so does the effort required for the stakeholder
engagement activity to achieve its intended performance
targets [7]. Stakeholder engagement is an iterative process
throughout the project’s life cycle [37], and it should
­commence during the earliest stages possible [38].
2.4. Conceptual framework
Our project stakeholder management framework based
on literature research consists of six key activities:
stakeholder identification, analysis, prioritization, early
involvement, integration, and engagement. Effective
project stakeholder management aims to unify stakeholders as a project organization working collaboratively toward project objectives to mitigate the silo
mindset and sub-optimization and to synergize individual competencies to be able to choose the best solutions
for a project. Notably, it is critical to create a stakeholder
management model for PED projects, balancing even
the contradictory requirements of separate stakeholders
for the benefit of the project. The early involvement of

94

stakeholders engenders collaboration, which, in turn,
facilitates mutual trust and communication and enables
better results, performance, and value creation for the
project [39, 40, 41].
3. Research methodology
This research started with an aim to understand stakeholder management for forthcoming PED projects and
subsequently expand the body of research on managing
stakeholders in complex inter-organizational projects. A
forthcoming PED project enabled a case study approach,
and we collected empirical data from two interconnected
case projects that were embedded in the same PED. Our
study followed the theory elaboration methodology. In
theory elaboration, prior conceptual ideas and models
are used as a basis for developing new theoretical
insights [42, 43]. The case study approach was chosen
for its feasibility for the theory elaboration method [44]
and its suitability for practical implications within the
specific context. Furthermore, a case study is an appropriate approach as the nature of the project is new and
unique, requiring a detailed qualitative analysis. For this
study, we began by drawing the general conceptual
framework for managing stakeholders in complex projects, and then elaborated it to the context of PED projects for a more detailed illustration.
Data for the case study were collected in 2020 using
various methods to form a comprehensive understanding
of the project’s background, important events, impacting
actors, common objectives, and challenges encountered.
Ten semi-structured interviews were arranged with representatives of relevant project partners. In addition, our
case PED project meetings were participated in, enabling
participatory observation. Memorandums of past meetings were also examined. The project’s EU level

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

Juha-Antti Rankinen, Sara Lakkala, Harri Haapasalo and Sari Hirvonen-Kantola

Figure 3: Research methodology and research process
Table 1: Main informants in the case project interviews
Type of Data Collection

Title

Organization

Interview

Geodesist

City

Interview

Urban planner

City

Interview

Project manager

City

Interview

Development manager

City

Interview

Researcher, urban design and planning

University

Interview

Principal scientist

Research center

Interview

Development manager

Energy company

Interview

Development engineer

Energy company

Interview

Construction manager

Housing company

Interview

Project engineer

Grocery company

d­eliverables, technical plans and drawings, related
websites, newspaper articles and land use contracts
­
between project partners were likewise studied.
The case analysis started with analyzing the case
materials and forming an understanding of the cases’
events and main stakeholder positions. Based on the
collected data, timelines for both cases were formed to
recognize major occurrences and the actions leading to
them. Afterward, detailed case descriptions covering the
key actors and events of the cases were written.
Stakeholder salience assessment was constructed to
illustrate stakeholder positioning in the case projects.
During the empirical analysis of the data, the focus of
examinations was on deployed stakeholder management
practices and stakeholder management related issues.
The aim of the empirical analysis was to identify the
differences, shortcomings, and additions compared with
the presented theoretical framework.
4. Positive energy districts
By a definition, a PED consists of “buildings that
actively manage the energy flow between them and the

broader energy (electricity, heating and cooling) and
mobility systems by making optimal use of advanced
materials, local renewables, storage, demand response,
electric vehicle smart-charging and ICT” [4]. It can be
described as an urban neighborhood working toward a
surplus production of renewable energy with annual net
zero energy import and net zero CO2 emissions. PED
projects seek to implement energy transition, optimize
the amount of energy produced locally, and boost the use
of renewable energy, waste recovery technologies, and
innovative storage solutions to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. The impacts of a PED can also be recognized
at social and economic levels with the creation of new
business models and jobs, attraction of investors, and
increase of the citizens’ involvement in energy issues
through citizen engagement.
PED projects can be characterized as complex
inter-organizational projects because they apply new
technologies with relatively low maturity levels, combine various stakeholders with different backgrounds,
and require the formation of new collaborative business
models. PEDs require aligning multiple city departments’ and other stakeholders’ processes and objectives

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

95

Stakeholder management in PED projects: challenges and management model

Figure 4: PED project phases in our case projects

by overcoming the traditional silo mindset in collaborative work. However, managing the interests and
­constraints of both internal and external stakeholders of
a PED requires a high degree of coordination.
In our case projects, an initial plan for the optimal
path of planning and implementing PEDs aiming to harmonize cities’ spatial planning with energy planning
(Figure 4) was created. At the beginning of a PED, a
thorough diagnosis of the city must be made to clarify
and assess the state of city plans, energy demand, and
long-term visions. Potential areas should be researched
and compared to identify the optimal district location
and set geographical boundaries for the PED. The later
phases rearrange the focus toward citizen participation
and the needed technologies and energy solutions.
Barriers and enablers for the PED project should be­
recognized and evaluated to identify any political,
­economic, social, technological, environmental, or legal
constraints that require specific actions. The planning
process is completed with a verifying calculation of the
annual energy balance and the formation of detailed
plans for the technical solutions.
4.1. Case descriptions
The case project is a PED project taking place in Oulu,
Finland. It is a part of an EU Horizon 2020 Smart Cities
and Communities Lighthouse innovation project entitled
MAKING-CITY – Energy efficient pathway for the city
transformation (2018–2023). Herein, the PED concept is

96

demonstrated, tested, and validated in two lighthouse
cities. During the project, the aim is also to replicate the
demonstrated PED solutions in six follower cities by
utilizing the knowledge gathered in the pilot projects.
For the Oulu PED, there are seven local partners and an
EU project level coordinator planning and implementing
the PED as a collaboration.
The PED in Oulu will be consisting of at least a grocery store and multiple apartment buildings in its vicinity. These buildings will be sharing an energy network
infrastructure that works around an existing district
heating network. The buildings are equipped with
energy systems utilizing new technologies to generate
renewable energy and heat to be transferred between the
PED actors. The PED partners and their roles in the
project are presented in Table 2. The two cases
are sub-projects under the PED project of Oulu. The two
are studied and described separately to gain more
­comprehensive insights into the PED and its challenges.
4.1.1. Case 1
The first case revolves around a collaboration between
the City-owned Rental Housing Company and the Cityowned Energy Company in the PED project. The
Housing Company takes part in the PED project by
building two new apartment buildings and retrofitting an
existing one to fit the PED energy network. The energy
solutions for these buildings are planned and implemented as a collaboration with the Energy Company.

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

Juha-Antti Rankinen, Sara Lakkala, Harri Haapasalo and Sari Hirvonen-Kantola

Table 2: Partner organizations’ roles in our case PED project
Partner Organization

Role in the PED Project

Fundacíon Cartif, Spanish Nonprofit Research Institution
(Coordinator)

Coordinating at the EU project level, reporting, managing the entity

City of Oulu (Lighthouse City)

Decision making and enabling, urban and land use planning,
coordinating at the local level, organizing meetings

University of Oulu (Technical Partner)

Recognizing the idea of a PED in Oulu, gathering the project group,
conducting research, supporting partners

VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, a Finnish
Government-owned Nonprofit Technology Research Center
(Technical Partner)

Innovative energy systems design, managing the technical planning,
implementing a monitoring system

City-owned Energy Company (Energy Company)

Owner and operator of district heating network, planning, investing,
and implementing the related energy systems, as well as measuring and
maintaining them

Finnish Grocery and Restaurant Cooperative (Grocery
Company)

Building a grocery store that produces heat for the PED network

City-owned Rental Housing Company (Housing Company)

Building two new apartment buildings and renovating one apartment
building with innovative energy solutions, enabling monitoring of PED
solutions

Private Construction Company (Construction Company)

Building (expectedly) two new apartment buildings with innovative
energy solutions, main constructor of the grocery store

The stakeholder network of Case 1 is presented in the
stakeholder assessment matrix in Figure 5.
The EU project application formation was conducted with the whole project consortium and can be
described as the planning phase of the PED project.
This phase consisted of meetings with the whole

p­roject group, smaller gatherings with some of the
actors, and emailing information back and forth. The
Housing Company planned their own premises in
the PED network, the energy solutions used in them
and the required investments together with the Energy
Company.

Figure 5: Case 1 stakeholder network

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

97

Stakeholder management in PED projects: challenges and management model

When the application was accepted and the project
officially started, the Energy Company began to rethink
the centralized energy production system they had originally planned and agreed upon with the project partners. The plans would have required a low temperature
heat distribution network infrastructure besides the district heating network already existing in the area. For
various financial and technical reasons, constructing an
overlapping infrastructure solely for the PED project’s
purposes no longer seemed like the most feasible
­decision.
The Energy Company began changing the plans to
include the existing district heating network by replacing one centralized heat pump with four smaller ones
that would operate in different buildings of the PED.
This fundamental change caused close to a year-long
delay in the project, as the systems for each PED building had to be rethought and the investment financials
recalculated. After the new solutions were planned, a
competent System Supplier was chosen to deliver
energy solutions.
As of this writing, the project is at construction and
implementation phase. As the City of Oulu wanted to
ensure a diverse housing stock in the area, the land use
agreements implementing the regeneration plan for the
wider urban neighborhood included a schedule that
allowed for the private Construction Company to begin
non-subsidized construction and selling before the CityOwned Housing Company. This delay posed an inconvenience for the Energy Company, as their preferred
option would have been a swifter schedule.
The final collaborative business model concerning
the energy solutions and heat transfer between the
Housing Company and the Energy Company is still in
progress. The basis of the energy system is in the district
heating network owned by the Energy Company, but the
new equipment will be operating in the Housing
Company’s buildings, making them the platform of
energy production. Both companies have invested in the
shared systems, and both utilize each other’s energy and
surplus heat in their own energy processes. This arrangement makes the pricing and compensation policies
­complicated.
4.1.2. Case 2
The second case is an analogical case description with
the prior one. Its events take place in the same PED
project in Oulu but are focused on the planning and
building of a grocery store that works as a central energy

98

producer in the PED network. The participants of this
case are presented in Figure 6.
Once the PED project group began the technical planning of the PED entity, the Grocery Company started to
plan its store’s energy solutions in detail together with
the Energy Company. The store was planned to have
versatile energy-efficient solutions, such as a carbon
dioxide-based refrigeration system, energy-efficient
LED lighting, condensing heat recovery, and solar
panels. The produced energy would cover the store’s
energy demand and the surplus would be transferred to
other PED buildings through a low-temperature heat
distribution network that would be constructed during
the project.
Although the grocery store was built a lot earlier than
the rest of the PED buildings, the upcoming energy network had to be taken into consideration during the construction of the store. The store with its energy systems
was constructed with the Construction Company as the
main contractor. Multiple subcontractors hired by the
Grocery Store and the Energy Company worked with
the store’s HVAC, electricity, refrigeration appliances,
and energy systems.
Shortly after the official launch of the EU project, the
Energy Company realized that the original plan with the
low-temperature heat distribution network was not executable. The whole project group had to move from the
agreed plan to a decentralized system that worked along
the existing district heating network. As the grocery
store had been constructed according to the original
plans, the modification ended up being an inconvenience for the Grocery Company. Some of the energy
systems had to be replaced with different ones, which
resulted in technical difficulties for the transfer of the
produced energy from the store into the district heating
network. The low-temperature heat distribution network
would have been the preferred choice with more benefits
and efficiency for the Grocery Company.
At the time of our research data collection, the
Grocery Company and the Energy Company do not have
a contract on their shared business model yet. Instead,
they rely on mutual trust and a verbal agreement. The
basis of the business model is that the Grocery Company
produces energy for the district heating network owned
by the Energy Company and should receive some compensation. The fundamentals of the pricing politics are
still under discussion and both actors want to keep track
of and learn more about the energy amounts and
­efficiencies before final agreements are drawn up.

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

Juha-Antti Rankinen, Sara Lakkala, Harri Haapasalo and Sari Hirvonen-Kantola

Figure 6: Case 2 stakeholder network

4.2. Challenges in stakeholder mapping and
management
The identification of influential stakeholders in the project is critical for success. While no distinct stakeholder
management process or a designated manager for stakeholder activities was in place, the project group and
representatives managed in conjunction to identify and
integrate all relevant internal stakeholders of the project.
External stakeholders were identified and approached by
hosting multiple participatory urban planning events and
by asking public opinions before the EU and PED project preparation as the city was planning for the regeneration of the district. Nonetheless, the energy-planning
aspect was not included in the participatory urban planning, and many of the interviewed participants felt that
the informing and incorporation of external stakeholders
was not sufficient and should have been given more
effort. Lacking the official stakeholder management,
there was no clear perception which stakeholders and
claims should be prioritized. Often enough, the interviewees felt that those with the loudest voice got their
will though.
The ambiguity was further heightened by the fact that
management was divided into two levels. At the EU
project level, the project was managed by the Coordinator,
while at the local level by the Project Manager. At times,
the participants perceived the EU project level management to be problematic due to the bureaucracy involved.

Due to the separation of management, decisions were
more difficult to change, inducing inflexibility to the
project. At the local level, the project utilized a shared
leadership approach, rather than a traditional strict management one. This arrangement received varied feedback. Some felt that in a project of this type, it was the
only feasible method, while others noted its engendered
unclarity and would have welcomed a more coordinated
and sturdier managerial grip. Nevertheless, due to earlier
collaborations between a few of the local project participants, common trust was still present within the project
organization, enabling smooth cooperation and decision
making. Still, it was noticeable that the shared leadership style with no strict or clear responsibilities facilitated a rather uncontrolled management of various
project participants’ requirements at some points of the
project.
One of the preeminent challenges the project faced
was when a distinct revision had to be made to change
the plans from a centralized energy system to a decentralized one. The change was initiated by the Energy
Company and stated as necessary. This instilled uncertainty and inconvenience among the project partners.
However, the project group managed the adjustment
well, and many a partner recognized such unpredictability as inevitability in a long-lasting novel project.
The uncertainty within the open EU project call was
also acknowledged. Not all parties were willing to invest

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

99

Stakeholder management in PED projects: challenges and management model

more effort to a project of which funding was not certain
yet. Simultaneously, others required and demanded a
higher degree of commitment from the rest. The participants felt that a deeper commitment could have made
the EU project application phase easier. It was also noted
that the challenges in the application phase could have
been reduced with clearer roles and responsibilities
among the project participants.
The project lacked a shared working location, which
could have made the project environment and progress
clearer for many. Instead, shared virtual workspaces
were created for the project. As per the interviewees,
virtual workspaces are not intended to replace a shared
workspace and unfortunately lacked further utilization
for collaborative purposes beyond project documentation sharing. The lack of a shared environment conjoined with diverse stakeholder groups may have given
rise to disparate perceptions about the project. For some,
the project had the position of being a pioneering
research project. For others, it was perceived most as a
daily construction business. The variety of the perceptions and goals, while aligned at the broader level,
induced a burden for the project stakeholders. Clearer
roles and more distinctly articulated project objectives
could have granted remedy.
The main challenges encountered in our case projects
can be summarized as lack of definite stakeholder

a­ nalysis and prioritization, a feeble integration toward
an inter-organizational project entity, sluggish decision
making, technological redevelopment, unwillingness for
early commitment, and incoherent coordination of
responsibilities.
4.3. PED stakeholder management model
Integrated energy and spatial planning, optimized
land use agreements, and detailed plans
The empirical study identified detailed urban plans and
land use agreements as key preconditions for the PED
project. Detailed plans outline the course of urban development in the neighborhood in the form of determining
buildings’ and constructs’ functions, sizes, locations, and
other characteristics, such as plans for transportation,
public and commercial services, and retaining appropriate recreation areas. Land use agreements determine
how the owners or tenants of the properties will execute
the detailed plans for the area. Thus, these plans lay the
foundation and baseline for the PED project. These
plans also determine the actors of the PED and act as
initiators and enablers for PED projects.
In both cases, the detailed plans and land use agreements were prepared before acknowledging the prospects of PED projects in the area. Thus, the
implementation of the PED in the area was not a succession to a systematic planning. Rather, it was fitted to

Figure 7: Stakeholder management model of a PED

100

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

Juha-Antti Rankinen, Sara Lakkala, Harri Haapasalo and Sari Hirvonen-Kantola

pre-existing requirements and agreements. The findings
suggest that such a case can cause multiple challenges
for the project implementation. In an optimal scenario
for future cases, integrated energy and spatial planning
approach should account for future PED prospects and
incorporate infrastructure readiness for novel renewable
energy solutions.
Stakeholder analysis and prioritization
A PED project involves multiple stakeholders that have
a central part in accomplishing project tasks and play a
crucial role in the overall project success. Due to the
variety of stakeholders coming from different industries
with various backgrounds and connecting the goals of
private businesses, plans of public institutions, and
desires of future residents, the role of stakeholder management is emphasized. It is worth mentioning that
stakeholder management processes are needed to
improve the project management’s understanding of the
involved stakeholders and their needs. Stakeholder analysis should be conducted to unveil information about the
expectations and requirements that the different stakeholders have about the project to help management
come up with informed decisions and to support the
project partners. The key stakeholder analysis activities
that should be included are identification, classification,
and prioritization of PED stakeholders. The first objective should be to identify all constituents who enable the
project, affect the project’s success, or who should be
further analyzed. Once these stakeholder groups
are identified, their importance to the project should be
analyzed and their capability to influence the project
should be evaluated.
Early involvement of relevant stakeholders
Stakeholders should be involved early on in the PED
discussions and planning. They should also be integrated
in the detailed energy systems design and investment
planning conducted in the early stages of a PED project.
This would ensure a more accurate and efficient planning, decrease costly revisions in later stages and
enhance the collaboration and integration among the
project participants. The three key focus areas are 1)
enabling commitment, trust, and collaboration 2) clarification of common project objectives, and 3) finalization
of technical solutions, investments, and schedules.
Management of collaboration and communication
A PED combines multiple stakeholders working together
toward a mutual goal, with each simultaneously
­maintaining its own objectives in the project. Managing

this expansive combination of demands, interests, and
claims requires a high level of coordination from the
project management side. A project manager with
clearly delineated responsibilities is essential to coordinate the collaborations of project partners and to ensure
progress toward the attainment of the common goals.
The project manager leads the direction of collaboration
and collaborative decision making. To foster an efficient
and collaborative project environment, open communication should be practiced. Regular meetings with clear
agendas are a practical way to keep all partner organizations informed. Mutual trust is one of the cornerstones
of collaboration, and it requires sophisticated effort,
especially if the partnering entities have no prior
­relationships.
Clarification of ecosystem structure and business
models
An additional complicating element to a PED project is
devising and agreeing on ecosystem structures and business models regarding energy production. The groups of
businesses and entities forming the completed district
form a new cooperated energy ecosystem, linking the
participants together. This new PED ecosystem can be
regarded as a new entity established by adjusting
the pre-existing business models of the partners. If the
structure and detailed agreements of the ecosystem are
left open ended or only agreed upon at the moment of
completion, unnecessary uncertainty may emerge during
the project. Such include energy flow between the entities, investments for the equipment, compensations paid
for the energy produced, and the maintenance requirements and responsibilities for the systems. Therefore, it
is critical to plan the principles in such a way that they
are beneficial for both the individual organizations and
the whole ecosystem. Making an unequivocal business
model and structure for an entity is problematic, as multiple actors exchange energy back and forth. Further
challenges exist in different legislations, whereby taxation and energy transmission costs may be applied
repeatedly. In order to implement new, optimized and
energy-efficient business models that endorse sustainable development, legislations concerning energy production and transmission may require updating.
Involvement of local residents
An increasingly important part of stakeholder management is the acknowledgement and engagement of external
stakeholders. In the PED context, these external stakeholders are mainly local neighboring residents and future

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

101

Stakeholder management in PED projects: challenges and management model

residential customers. In the case of the Oulu PED, being
based in the district heating network that is developed as
part of a public infrastructure and joined by housing cooperatives, the citizens are not vital for PED project implementation but they certainly are for reaching an energy
surplus during the PED use. If these stakeholder groups
are not properly involved and embedded in the project,
they may end up opposing it. Their involvement aims to
convey information and understanding about the project
and its purpose to these stakeholder groups. A more comprehensive approach should involve participatory planning regarding external stakeholders’ preferences for
living conditions and energy solutions. When the end-users of the PED project are heard, project outcomes are
more likely to be satisfactory for them. Explaining and
informing the purpose of a PED may also increase the
interest and demand for services and housing for those
sharing the values of sustainability and decrease any
potential confusion that the project may cause.
5. Conclusions
A PED is characterized by its convoluted stakeholder
environment. The sheer number of project stakeholders
in the district development project can become substantial and the variety of involved actors may be considerable. Together with the demand for energy-related
technical requirements, this calls for a degree of collaboration that goes beyond traditional project delivery.
Furthermore, employment of new technologies entails
new types of parties being involved into project environment. With these major characteristics present, we
emphasize the crucial role of stakeholder analysis and
management for the success of a PED project.
The vast array of stakeholders and their interests need
to be carefully understood and balanced to create a
viable working environment and to form an integrated
project team to undertake these nontraditional district
development projects. Integration and early involvement
improve the chances of project success through mutual
trust building and synergetic problem solving, as similarly noted by prior literature assessing complex projects
[e.g., 25, 27]. Distinct to a PED, a few key actions are
identified and described. Unique to the PED project
context are the aspects of integrated energy and spatial
planning, optimized land use agreements, and detailed
urban plans. In addition, the initial step of the project
phases carries significance, as the land use agreements
and detailed urban plans may work as enablers or

102

l­imiters of the success of a PED. Ecosystem structure
plays another significant and rather unique part in a PED
project. Conjoining the new energy ecosystem into
existing business models requires sophisticated planning
and agreements. Finally, the involvement of local residents in the upcoming PED area is crucial for PEDs to
reach their energy targets. Based on these findings, we
propose a new stakeholder management framework
(Figure 7) targeted for PED projects.
5.1. Scientific implications
The findings of this research are in agreement with
many principles of stakeholder literature. Our findings
align with the stakeholder approach [12] for project success. The findings also support the advantage gained by
early involvement [27] and stakeholder prioritization
[18, 20, 21] in the context of PED projects. Studying a
PED project serves the project stakeholder management
research, as it represents a complex inter-organizational
project that is characterized by the simultaneous engagement of various stakeholders with vastly different backgrounds, and objectives, and the involvement of new
technologies, concepts, and business models.
Furthermore, this paper contributes to the time-relevant and growing body of research addressing the transition toward next generation district energy systems
(see e.g., [45, 46, 47]). Local energy transitions play a
significant part in achieving set sustainability and
carbon neutralism objectives [45], and PEDs are one of
the meaningful pathways for implementing these transitions. Our approach strongly supports Butu and Strachan
[45] in wide stakeholder engagement in early project
planning and is aligned with Krog et al. [47] in highlighting the importance of end-user involvement and
engagement in enabling successful technological transition for district energy systems.
5.2. Managerial implications
To achieve a desirable project performance for PED
formation and implementation, management needs to
incorporate a stakeholder mindset. The findings offer
reasoning and evidence on the importance of stakeholder understanding and management in upcoming
PED projects. Understanding the distinctive characteristics and stakeholder dynamics of a PED environment
enables management to focus appropriate resources and
efforts to the most crucial areas.
Besides PEDs, the findings offer utilization in other
forms of inter-organizational energy related projects in

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

Juha-Antti Rankinen, Sara Lakkala, Harri Haapasalo and Sari Hirvonen-Kantola

urban environments. The emphasized issues remain the
same regardless of the specific environment: the influence of urban planning and land use agreements, the role
of management, stakeholder behavior, communication
across stakeholder groups, and the challenges initiated
by new shared business models.
5.3. Limitations and further research areas
Being an innovation project, the PED concept and project was studied under specific circumstances. The case
project took place within the MAKING-CITY project.
Thus, some of the partnering organizations were able to
obtain EU funding for their investments. As this may not
be the case in upcoming PEDs, stakeholder saliency
findings, for example, may not be directly applicable in
future PED projects. Additionally, most of the project
actors knew each other well from earlier collaborations.
This enabled particularly easy decision making and collaboration in the endeavor, which may distort the implications for upcoming projects. In future PEDs, forming
rather complex ecosystem structures may prove to be a
more challenging feat if a sufficient degree of mutual
trust between the participants has not been reached. The
city’s role in PEDs may also vary from project to project
depending on the location. Therefore, the results may
not be directly suitable for all PEDs; rather, they may
server as guidelines as to what factors affect the stakeholder network of PEDs.
Being an innovation project and part of a larger development scheme, the presence of research interests may
distort parts of the findings. Validating studies could be
initiated in future PED projects to confirm the findings
in a more independent, market-driven environment.
Acknowledgements
This project has received funding from the European
H2020 Research and Innovation program under the
Grant Agreement n°824418. The content of this document reflects only the author’s view. The European
Commission is not responsible for any use that may be
made of the information it contains.

References
[1]

Goldthay A. Rethinking the governance of energy infrastructure:
Scale, decentralization and polycentrism. Energy Research &
Social Science 1 (2014) p 134-140. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
erss.2014.02.009
[2] Verbong G, Geels F. The ongoing energy transition: Lessons
from a socio-technical, multi-level analysis of the Dutch
electricity system (1960-2004). Energy Policy 35(2) (2007) p
1025-1037. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2006.02.010
[3] Fitzgerald J, Lenhart J. Eco-districts: can they accelerate urban
climate planning? Environment and Planning C: Government
and Policy 34(2) (2016) p 364-380. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/0263774X15614666
[4] European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and
Innovation, Joint Research Centre. The strategic energy
technology (SET) plan. Luxembourg: Publications Office of
the European Union (2019). https://data.europa.eu/
doi/10.2777/293881
[5] Clemente, C, Civiero, P, Cellurale, M. Solutions and services
for smart sustainable district: an innovative approach in KPI to
support transition. International Journal of Sustainable Energy
Planning and Management 24 (2019) p 95-106. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5278/ijsepm.3350
[6] Aaltonen K, Kujala J, Oijala T. Stakeholder salience in global
projects. International journal of project management 26(5) (2008)
p 509-516. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2008.05.004
[7] Aaltonen K, Kujala J. Towards an improved understanding of
project stakeholder landscapes. International Journal of Project
Management 34(8) (2016) p 1537-1552. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2016.08.009
[8] European Commission, Directorate-General for Energy, Joint
Research Centre. SET plan delivering results: the implementation
plans: research & innovation enabling the EU’s energy
transition. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European
Union (2018) https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2833/109890
[9] Turkulainen V, Aaltonen K, Lohikoski P. Managing Project
Stakeholder Communication: The Qstock Festival Case. Project
Management Journal 46(6) (2015) p 74-91. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/pmj.21547
[10] Aaltonen K. Stakeholder management in international projects.
Ph.D. Thesis, Espoo: Aalto University; 2010. http://urn.fi/
URN:ISBN:978-952-60-3344-0
[11] Aaltonen K, Kujala K. A project lifecycle perspective on
stakeholder influence strategies in global projects. Scandinavian
Journal of Management 26(4) (2010) p 381-397. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.scaman.2010.09.001
[12] Freeman RE. Strategic management: A stakeholder approach.
Boston, MA: Pitman; 1984. ISBN:978-027-30-1913-8

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

103

Stakeholder management in PED projects: challenges and management model

[13] Chinyio EA, Akintoye A. Practical approaches for engaging
stakeholders: Findings from the UK. Construction Management
and Economics 26(6) (2008) p 591-599. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/01446190802078310
[14] Donaldson T, Preston LE. The stakeholder theory of the
corporation: Concepts, evidence, and implications. Academy of
management Review 20(1) (1995) p 65-91. http://dx.doi.
org/10.5465/amr.1995.9503271992
[15] Beringer C, Jonas D, Gemünden HG. Establishing project portfolio
management: An exploratory analysis of the influence of internal
stakeholders’ interactions. Project Management Journal 43(6)
(2012) p 16-32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pmj.21307
[16] Eesley C, Lenox MJ. Firm responses to secondary stakeholder
action. Strategic Management Journal 27(8) (2006) p 765-781.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/smj.536
[17] Greenley GE, Hooley GJ, Broderik HA, Rudd J. Strategic
planning differences among different multiple stakeholder
orientation profiles. Journal of Strategic Marketing 12(3) (2004)
p 163-182. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0965254042000262887
[18] Mitchell RK, Agle BR, Wood DJ. Toward a theory of
stakeholder identification and salience: Defining the principle
of who and what really counts. Academy of Management
Review 22(4) (1997) p 853-886. http://dx.doi.org/10.5465/
amr.1997.9711022105
[19] Salancik GR, Pfeffer J. The bases and use of power in
organizational decision making: The case of a university.
Administrative Science Quarterly 19(4) (1974) p 453-473.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2391803
[20] Olander S. Stakeholder impact analysis in construction project
management. Construction Management and Economics 25(3)
(2007) p 277-287. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01446190600879125
[21] Aapaoja A, Haapasalo H. A framework for stakeholder
identification and classification in construction projects. Open
Journal of Business and Management 2(1) (2014) p 43-55.
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/ojbm.2014.21007
[22] Baiden BK, Price ADF, Dainty ARJ. The extent of team
integration within construction projects. International Journal
of Project Management 24(1) (2006) p 13-23. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2005.05.001
[23] Evbuomwan NFO, Anumba CJ. An integrated framework for
concurrent life-cycle design and construction. Advances in
engineering software 29(7-9) (1998) p 587-597. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0965-9978(98)00024-6
[24] Hietajärvi AM, Aaltonen K, Haapasalo H. Managing integration
in infrastructure alliance projects. International Journal of
Managing Projects in Business 10(1) (2017) p 5-31. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1108/IJMPB-02-2016-0009
[25] Pekkinen L, Kujala J. Collaborative meeting as an integrative
mechanism in a multinational investment project. Technology

104

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

and Investment 5(1) (2014) p 45-55. http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/
ti.2014.51006
Matthews O, Howell GA. Integrated project delivery an
example of relational contracting, Lean Constructing Journal
2(1) (2005) p 46-61. https://leanconstruction.org/uploads/wp/
media/docs/lcj/V2_N1/LCJ_05_003.pdf
Aapaoja A, Herrala M, Pekuri A, Haapasalo H, The
characteristics of and cornerstones for creating integrated
teams. International Journal of Managing Projects in Business
6(4) (2013) p 695-710. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/IJMPB-092012-0056
Möttönen M, Härkönen J, Belt P, Haapasalo H, Similä S.
Managerial view on design for manufacturing. Industrial
Management & Data Systems 109(6) (2009) p 859-872. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1108/02635570910968081
Engwall M. The futile dream of the perfect goal. In: SahlinAndersson K, Söderholm A, editors. Beyond Project
Management. Copenhagen Business School Press; 2002. p 261277. ISBN: 978-87-630-0107-6
Lahdenperä P. Making sense of the multi-party contractual
arrangements of project partnering, project alliancing and
integrated project delivery. Construction Management and
Economics 30(1) (2012) p 57-79. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01
446193.2011.648947
Saukko L, Aaltonen K, Haapasalo, H. Inter-organizational
collaboration challenges and preconditions in industrial
engineering projects. International Journal of Managing
Projects in Business 13(5) (2020) p 999-1023. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1108/IJMPB-10-2019-0250
O’Connor, JT, Miller SJ. Barriers to constructability
implementation. Journal of Performance of Constructed
Facilities 8(2) (1994) p 110-128. https://doi.org/10.1061/
(ASCE)0887-3828(1994)8:2(110)
Song L, Mohamed Y, AbouRizk, SM. Early contractor
involvement in design and its impact on construction schedule
performance. Journal of Management in Engineering 25(1)
(2009) p 12-20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0742597X(2009)25:1(12)
Kujala J, Sachs S. The Practice of Stakeholder Engagement. In:
Harrison, JS, Barney JB, Freeman RE, Philips RA, editors. The
Cambridge Handbook of Stakeholder Theory. Cambridge
University Press; 2019, p. 227-241. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1017/9781108123495.014
Greenwood M. Stakeholder engagement: beyond the myth of
corporate responsibility. Journal of Business Ethics 74(4) (2007)
p 315-327. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10551-007-9509-y
Bal M, Bryde D, Fearon D, Ochieng E. Stakeholder engagement:
achieving sustainability in the construction sector. Sustainability
5(2) (1013) p 695-710. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/su5020695

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

Juha-Antti Rankinen, Sara Lakkala, Harri Haapasalo and Sari Hirvonen-Kantola

[37] Jeffery N. Stakeholder engagement: a road map to meaningful
engagement. Doughty Centre for Corporate Responsibility,
Cranfield School of Management; 2009. https://www.
fundacionseres.org/lists/informes/attachments/1118/
stakeholder%20engagement.pdf
[38] Yang J, Shen GQ, Ho M, Drew DS, Chan APC. Exploring
critical success factors for stakeholder management in
construction projects. Journal of Civil Engineering and
Management 15(4) (2009) p 337-348. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3846/1392-3730.2009.15.337-348
[39] Aapaoja A, Malvalehto J, Herrala M, Pekuri A, Haapasalo H.
The level of stakeholder integration – Sunnyvale case.
Proceedings for the 20th Annual Conference of the International
Group for Lean Construction (2012). https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/265177402_The_level_of_stakeholder_
integration_-_Sunnyvale_case
[40] Ghassemi R, Becerik-Gerber B. Transitioning to integrated
project delivery: potential barriers and lessons learned. Lean
Construction Journal (2011) p 32-52. https://leanconstruction.
org/media/docs/lcj/2011/LCJ_11_sp3.pdf
[41] Ibrahim KI, Costello SB, Wilkinson S. Key practice indicators of
team integration in construction projects: a review. Team

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

Performance Management: An International Journal 19(3/4)
(2013) p 132-152. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/TPM-10-2012-0033
Fisher G, Aguinis H. Using theory elaboration to make theoretical
advancements. Organizational Research Methods 20(3) (2017) p
438-464. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1094428116689707
Lee TW, Mitchell TR, Sablynski CJ. Qualitative research in
organizational and vocational psychology, 1979-1999. Journal
of Vocational Behavior 55(2) (1999) p 161-187. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1006/jvbe.1999.1707
Ketokivi M, Choi T. Renaissance of the case research as a
scientific method. Journal of Operations Management 32(5)
(2014) p 232-240. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2014.03.004
Selvakkumaran, S, Ahlgren, EO. Understanding the local
energy transitions process: a systematic review. International
Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management, 14
(2018) p 57-78. http://dx.doi.org/10.5278/ijsepm.2017.14.5
Butu, AI, Strachan, P. Navigating pathways for community
renewable electricity in rural areas: exploring stakeholders’
perspectives on Shape community project. International Journal
of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management, 33 (2022)
p 19-34. http://dx.doi.org/10.5278/ijsepm.6813

International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and Management Vol. 34 2022

105

[47] Krog, L, Sperling, K, Svangren, MK, Hvelplund, F. Consumer
involvement in the transition to 4th deneration district heating.
International Journal of Sustainable Energy Planning and
Management, 29 (2020) p 141-152. http://dx.doi.org/10.5278/
ijsepm.4627

