smart cities
Article

The Nexus between Market Needs and Value
Attributes of Smart City Solutions towards Energy
Transition. An Empirical Evidence of Two European
Union (EU) Smart Cities, Evora and Alkmaar
Paraskevi Giourka 1, * , Vasilis Apostolopoulos 1 , Komninos Angelakoglou 1 ,
Konstantinos Kourtzanidis 1 , Nikos Nikolopoulos 1 , Vasileios Sougkakis 1 ,
Federica Fuligni 2 , Stefano Barberis 2 , Karin Verbeek 3 , José Miguel Costa 4 and João Formiga 4
1

2
3
4

*

Chemical Process and Energy Resources Institute, Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, Thermi,
GR-57001 Thessaloniki, Greece; v.apostolopoulos@certh.gr (V.A.); angelakoglou@certh.gr (K.A.);
kourtzanidis@certh.gr (K.K.); n.nikolopoulos@certh.gr (N.N.); sougakis@certh.gr (V.S.)
RINA Consulting S.p.A. Via Antonio Cecchi, 6, 16129 Genova, Italy; federica.fuligni@rina.org (F.F.);
stefano.barberis@rina.org (S.B.)
Municipality of Alkmaar, Langestraat 97, 1800 BL Alkmaar, The Netherlands; kverbeek@alkmaar.nl
EDP New R&D Centre for New Energy Technologies, Rua Cidade de Goa, 4, 2685–039 Sacavém, Portugal;
Josemiguel.costa@edp.com (J.M.C.); Joao.formiga@edp.com (J.F.)
Correspondence: giourka@certh.gr; Tel.: +30-24630-55300



Received: 29 April 2020; Accepted: 30 June 2020; Published: 6 July 2020

Abstract: This study presents an experiential process and a market-oriented approach for realizing
cities’ energy transition through smart solutions. The aim of this study is twofold: (a) present a
process for defining a repository of innovative solutions that can be applied at building, district, or
city level, for two European Union cities, Evora and Alkmaar, and support the deployment of positive
energy districts enabling a sustainable energy transition, and (b) understand in a systematic way the
attributes of value offered by energy-related smart city solutions, in order to facilitate the development
of sustainable value propositions that can successfully address city needs. The repository is assessed
against four elements of value, which include social impact, life-changing, emotional, and functional
attributes, according to the value pyramid of Maslow. Results show that the value attributes of
quality, motivation, integration, cost reduction, information, and organization are highly relevant
to the proposed smart solutions. The results presented in this study are useful for city planners,
decision-makers, public bodies, citizens, and businesses interested in designing their energy transition
strategy and defining novel technologies that promote urban energy sustainability.
Keywords: smart cities; monitoring; innovation; market; energy transition; business models;
cultural heritage

1. Introduction
1.1. Towards a Sustainable Energy Transition—The Role of Cities and Positive Energy Districts
Cities play a vital role towards smart and sustainable development [1,2], rendering the ever-present
need to realize the transition towards a low-carbon energy system [3]. An urban transition agenda
addressing the challenges and impacts of climate change by incorporating innovative energy concepts
and regeneration models [4], beginning from the level of a building, a neighborhood, a district, or a
larger urban agglomeration and scaling-up to city level, is a developing cutting-edge research field [5].
Districts are part of a city and well-suited for the application, analysis, and impact evaluation of nearly
Smart Cities 2020, 3, 604–641; doi:10.3390/smartcities3030032

www.mdpi.com/journal/smartcities

Smart Cities 2020, 3

605

zero energy retrofit solutions [6], as well as the promotion of citizen engagement actions [7]. Therefore,
creating or readapting/refurbishing districts which can sufficiently adapt and respond to climate change
is key to facilitating energy transition, poverty eradication, and for safeguarding economic growth in
cities. Cities start from creating smart and sustainable districts demonstrating solutions to unleash the
potential of smart energy future, but also to function as a yardstick for monitoring and evaluating the
performance of key energy-related sectors.
The Net Zero-Energy District (NZED) term refers to a wide vision of urban sustainability at
district level, including net zero-energy buildings (NZEB), but also additional domains to demonstrate
innovative solutions such as urban mobility, street lighting, waste management, and public safety [8].
There are also similar affiliations defined in the worldwide community; namely: Energy Positive
Neighborhood (EPN); Positive Energy District (PED); with the last one adopted by the member
states in the EU. More specifically, a PED is defined as an energy efficient and energy flexible urban
neighborhood with annual net zero energy import and net zero CO2 emissions, aiming at an annual
local surplus production of renewable energy [9,10]. PEDs can become the small-scale demonstration
of interaction and interconnection between the building stock, the users and the local energy, mobility
and ICT system; all embraced within an agile approach of associated technological, geographical,
governmental, environmental, financial, legal, social, and economic aspects [9]. These small-scale
demonstrations are the next important step, particularly for the scalability and replication potential of
the solutions to other cities or regions.
A key step in the deployment of PEDs is establishing standards and creating the conditions that
reduce investment risks for the stakeholders intending to provide resources for realizing the transition.
An open innovation environment aligned well with the market needs and a strategic collaboration
of stakeholders such as public authorities, industrial leaders, investors, research organizations, and
citizen communities are key enablers in the development of cities that serve the needs of the citizens
and the urban environment [11].
Parallel to the creation of PEDs, it is worth noting that at a global level, some historic cities will
face an additional challenge to combine higher levels of efficiency with new and innovative ways of
retrofitting archaeological monuments or buildings of cultural interest. Energy inefficiency issues and
PEDs become furthermore complicated when national or international rules impose limitations and
legislation obstacles to retrofitting certain types of buildings. As such, historical cities need to think
innovatively to contextualize energy efficiency measures in the preserved and historic urban districts
with strong territorial particularities and enhance their fundamental impact on locals leading to a
sustainable yet functional urban environment [12], while preserving their cultural heritage character.
In this context, this paper presents a set of pioneering solutions in the sectors of energy, mobility,
ICT, waste, citizen engagement, and solutions for historic cities, that can be demonstrated at building,
district, and city level, enabling the deployment of PEDs. This set of solutions is the outcome of a
consultation process with the city authorities which initiates with the identification of their specific
needs and available resources, the supporting policy framework, and the adaptation of solutions to
serve those needs. Then, the value propositions of the solutions identified are collected through a
survey and market research is conducted to confirm that solutions selected coincide with market
trends, thus enabling their successful roll-out. Then, the aim of this research is to answer the following
research question: which are the attributes of value for the aforementioned solutions, that enable the
design of successful business cases and can eventually facilitate their roll-out? Consumer recognition
of value offered is central to any business model and many iterations of interactions with potential
end-users are often necessary for testing critical assumptions and adequately addressing their needs [13].
In addressing the research question, a case study approach is adopted, capitalizing on knowledge
and experience gained from POCITYF (A Positive Energy City Transformation Framework) [14],
a recently funded European H2020 smart city project, which identified and will try to orchestrate the
demonstration of solutions towards energy transition at two Lighthouse cities (LHs): Evora from
Portugal and Alkmaar from the Netherlands; as well as the replication of solutions in six Fellow Cities

Smart Cities 2020, 3

606

(FCs): Bari from Italy, Celje from Slovenia, Granada from Spain, Hvidovre from Denmark, Ioannina
from Greece, and Ujpest from Hungary. A first iteration in capturing how potential consumers perceive
the attributes of value for the aforementioned solutions is performed to guide the development of
future business models.
The remain of this paper is organized as follows: Section 1.2 provides an overview of supporting
policies for PEDs and smart city projects in the EU, Section 2 provides an analysis of the specific LH
city needs identified for Evora and Alkmaar; being also the replication model basis for the FCs. Those
specific needs form the basis for analyzing what global objectives pertain that lead the implementation
of measures for realizing energy transition while linking them to certain policies. Then, a repository of
innovative solutions, the implementation of which can result in energy positiveness of the selected
PEDs in the two LHs, is presented along with methods for studying the attributes of value offered by
each smart city solution identified in the repository. Section 3 presents the analysis of the results, which
can inform the development of successful value propositions, and Section 4 concludes and provides
recommendations for future research actions and initiatives.
1.2. Supporting Policies Linked to PEDs and Smart City Projects
Europe is at the forefront of energy transition and climate resilience. It aims to become the first
climate-neutral continent [15] and a global example in implementing integrated, innovative solutions
for the deployment and replication of PEDs [16]. The goal is to create at least 100 PEDs by 2025 [16],
while the realization of many of those is already achieved or is in the phase of development [10].
To achieve the above-mentioned goals, the EU has set a number of policies and initiatives covering a
wide range of aspects, including positive energy buildings and districts deployment, developments
in information and communication technologies (ICT), mobility, and citizen engagement. The EU
Green Deal [15] provides a set of deeply transformative policies focusing, among others, on aspects
directly related to research and innovation in the energy sector, addressing the wider spectrum of
energy technologies and horizontal vectors contributing to the clean energy transition. European
Climate Law [17] enshrines the climate neutrality objective into legislation, by setting key targets of
40% greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions reduction and 32% renewable energy sources (RES) share
for 2030 and proposing a legally binding target of net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. In this
context, Horizon 2020 acts as a fulcrum for the development of smart cities as well as smart, sustainable,
and inclusive growth and jobs, constituting the largest financial instrument of EU Research and
Innovation [18].
Smart cities shape their future by leading in technology adoption, resource efficiency, and
citizen/stakeholder engagement. On a building level, the revised Energy Performance of Buildings
directive (EPBD) [19], together with the Energy Efficiency Directive (EED) [20] and the Renewable
Energy Directive (RED II) [21], are the major EU legislation/policies currently aiming to boost long-term
renovation of the EU’s building stock, creating a favorable environment for bringing innovative
construction products integrated with RES systems with better specifications into the market.
Regulation and policies (especially on an EU level) are becoming more and more ambitious and
strict in terms of energy performance at districts/city levels. Increased self-consumption and locally
produced energy is increasingly promoted. For instance, the recast of Renewable Energy Directive II to
2030 clearly defines the Renewable Energy Communities and Citizen Energy Communities, which aim
to give greater power to citizens for self-generation, and self-consumption of electricity is expected to
highly increase the demand for relevant solutions.
Additionally, if Europe wants to realize its decarbonization policies and meet its CO2 emissions
reduction goal of 40% by 2030, it needs to make a transition to a cleaner energy mix and establish 10-year
integrated national energy and climate plans (NECPs) [22]. Within this context, relevant solutions
of decentralized and dispatchable production based on renewable energy systems are increasingly
gaining attention. Furthermore, initiatives like the EU Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy [23]
have incentivized local authorities of cities to voluntarily commit into accelerating the decarbonization

Smart Cities 2020, 3

607

of their regions, strengthening their capacity to adapt to climate change, and allowing their citizens to
access secure, sustainable, and affordable energy. Thousands of local action plans have been developed
and include specific actions for reducing energy consumption and carbon footprint.
Sustainable waste utilization and management, although not directly relevant to the deployment of
PEDs, are also of major importance for a smart and sustainable city environment. The Waste Framework
Directive [24] obliges EU Member States to adopt and implement waste prevention programs. As the
requirements are becoming more ambitious and stricter for waste collection and treatment, market
demand for relevant solutions will be increased. Furthermore, the new Circular Economy Action
Plan [25] adopted in 2020 by the European Commission fosters the analysis and assessment of the
life cycle of products and materials to ensure sustainable use of resources, addressing areas that
require intensive resource use; e.g., construction, production of electronic and plastic products, as well
as renewables.
Developments in the ICT sector also accelerate the pace of digitalization in the energy systems [26].
The centralized approach of the grid-level energy management does not necessarily serve the needs of
smart cities [27]. Sophisticated energy management systems based on ICT novelties can nowadays
optimize decentralized networks that can capitalize on distributed energy sources (DER), such as
renewable energy, combined heating and power stations, or storage systems offering security of
supply, CO2 , and cost reduction. Therefore, ICT is an integral part of a smart city [28–30], ensuring
prompt connectivity among the various integrated elements, improved flexibility, and monitoring of
performance. In addition, a big step towards the creation of energy communities and Peer-to-Peer (P2P)
energy trading was realized in the EU by the recent “Clean Energy for all Europeans” package [30].
This encourages active consumers who can own and manage distributed energy resources (DERs)
individually with the aim to trade or exchange, among their peers, part of the self-generated energy.
In the transport sector, which is strongly related with the energy and the ICT sector, cities are
encouraged to design sustainable mobility measures and solutions towards cleaner and better transport.
The Transport White Paper [31] sets the basis for sustainable urban mobility in Europe, having two (2)
specific urban targets. The first target is to decrease by half the utilization of conventionally fueled
vehicles by 2030, aiming also at their phasing-out by 2050, and the second one is to successfully
bring up CO2 emission-free city logistics in major urban centers by 2030. In Europe, electrification of
transport is one of the main goals reflected in the revised European Roadmap Electrification of Road
Transport 2017 [32]. A Strategic Action Plan on Batteries [33] was also presented by the EC in 2019.
The regulatory framework that now enables the integration of Electric Vehicle (EV) charging points
to the distribution network, along with high RES share in the electricity grid, was recently adopted
by the EU legislation. The new Directive (EU) 2019/944 [34] sets new rules for the internal electricity
market, encouraging also access to consumers into electricity price comparison tools, smart charging,
and dynamic electricity price contracts. EV penetration will most probably be further increased over
the next years supported by this regulatory framework.
Finally, an essential element for achieving successful outcomes of smart city projects is to focus on
people’s needs and embrace citizen-centric design. Solutions are adopted more easily when they are
citizen-centric by means of citizens’ taking personal and collective responsibility for how they ‘use’
their city, changing their mindset, behaviors, and actions. Bottom-up urban regeneration requires
multi-directional information flows (i.e., city-to-citizen, citizen-to-citizen, citizen-to-city [35]) and
co-creation tools [36] (i.e., hackathons, urban living labs [37], crowd sourcing), for citizens to be
involved in designing the city in which they live in. Citizen participation and adoption of solutions is
also enhanced through the use of technologies and the digitization of offline services [38]. Initiatives
like the Action Cluster on Citizen Focus focus on the importance of engaging citizens and communities
in the design and co-creation of solutions for smarter cities [39].
The above versatile though interlinked set of policies create a dynamic environment in which
city authorities through smart city projects [40] can synthesize those enabling policy factors with
technological advancements and support their energy transition demonstrating, rolling-out, and

Smart Cities 2020, 3

608

scaling-up innovative solutions. In such a context, ecosystem stakeholders attempt to successfully
capture the value of those novel solutions within the market. Smart city projects are gaining popularity
in many countries [41], since they are considered a useful instrument for small- and large-scale
applications, that can also broaden cooperation between cities, communities, industries, and all related
policymakers and stakeholders [42].
2. Research Methodology
Many factors render it difficult to scale and replicate smart city projects. Common obstacles
include: (a) the technology risk, especially in the case of absence of a demonstrable proof of concept,
(b) the absence of adequate financial resources to implement a smart city solution, especially when a
monetized return on investment is not clear, (c) regulatory factors and administrative competence, the
existence of which is a pre-condition for the successful implementation of smart solutions, and (d)
social and stakeholder uptake factors, as the social norms and stakeholder behavior may impact the
adoption rates of smart city solutions that may eventually build a convincing track record, attract new
investors, and enable scalability. Based on the above observations, and the continuous call for cities
to realize energy transformation, it is important to understand the attributes of value offered by the
implementation of potential smart city solutions in order to develop successful value propositions,
which can be the basis for sustainable business models. The answer to the above question will be
useful for city planners, decision-makers, public bodies, and businesses interested in investing in novel
technologies that promote urban energy sustainability.
2.1. Setting Up a Process to Realize Energy Transition in Smart Cities Understanding Value Attributes of
Potential Solutions
In an attempt to address the above issues, this paper builds on the literature findings related to the
context of smart cities, and the pertaining policies and initiatives (top-down approach). In parallel, it
identifies specific city needs for two LH cities, Evora and Alkmaar (step 1), and develops key objectives
that serve the realization of the urban energy transition goals, but are also eventually linked to policies
(step 2). A matching process of appropriate smart novel solutions was initiated (bottom-up approach).
During this process, various smart solutions were explored by each city ecosystem. Solutions explored
were assessed against (a) the technology readiness level (TRL), (b) the cost effectiveness of the solution,
and (c) the impact towards achieving the goal of creating positive energy districts. The solutions
explored were of TRL6 to TRL8 and represented novel, highly efficient systems. The impact goal was
directly related to the percentage of positiveness to be reached for the districts selected. A threshold
value of more than 100% positiveness was set. Other socioeconomic aspects were also considered, such
as replicability potential, payback period for all solutions should be less than 10 years, and available
city budget. This process was implemented during the phase in which the two LHs were planning
the creation of their positive energy districts and laid the foundations for deriving a feasible and
market-oriented repository of smart cities solutions (step 3). This repository of solutions derived from
steps 1–3 can vary if the same process is applied in different cities. It was not the focus of this paper
to provide detailed guideline on how cities should select their solutions, but to briefly present the
process followed in POCITYF which was initiated with the identification of the city specific needs
and resources available, followed by linking those needs to supportive frameworks, i.e., policies and
initiatives, and selecting and adapting city specific solutions.
This repository shall also form the basis for potential solutions to be adopted by the FCs based on
their specific needs. The value attributes of the solutions identified were then investigated (step 4) in
order to understand the related dynamics for forming competitive value propositions and facilitate
the design of successful business models, while helping investors recognize potential cash flows.
Steps 1–3 are more relevant to stakeholders that are on the design phase of a PED, whereas Step 4 is
relevant to cities which have already defined the solutions to be demonstrated and are in the process of
designing the business cases for the successful roll out of those solutions (Figure 1). We used Maslow’s

Smart Cities 2020, 3

Smart Cities 2020, 3 FOR PEER REVIEW

609

6

elements of value for our analysis [43]. This research is valuable not only for determining a method for
understanding the potential value of solutions and thus help decision makers and stakeholders derive
a method for understanding the potential value of solutions and thus help decision makers and
conclusions on their potential success, but also for setting up a process to align innovations with the
stakeholders derive conclusions on their potential success, but also for setting up a process to align
evolving city needs and design sustainable value propositions.
innovations with the evolving city needs and design sustainable value propositions.

Figure 1. A four-step approach to support the development of successful value propositions.

2.1.1. Step 1: Identify City Needs—SWOT Analysis
2.1.1. Step 1: Identify City Needs—SWOT Analysis
Apart from common needs and challenges as imposed by the climate change and energy-related
Apart from common needs and challenges as imposed by the climate change and energy-related
goals on global scale, the cities of Evora and Alkmaar (Figure 2) face city- and district-specific
goals on global scale, the cities of Evora and Alkmaar (Figure 2) face city- and district-specific needs
needs and challenges due to divergent geography, geology, climate, and socio-economic and cultural
and challenges due to divergent geography, geology, climate, and socio-economic and cultural
characteristics. These characteristics mean they embark towards their urban energy transition from
characteristics. These characteristics mean they embark towards their urban energy transition from
different starting points and perspectives. A Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT)
different starting points and perspectives. A Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats
analysis was carried out at the two cities during the phase of planning their PEDs and is provided
(SWOT) analysis was carried out at the two cities during the phase of planning their PEDs and is
in the results section below. During the SWOT analysis, technical and innovation experts on energy
provided
in the
results section
below. During the SWOT analysis, technical and innovation experts7
Smart
Cities 2020,
3 FOR PEER
transition
participated
inREVIEW
the process of identifying strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats,
on energy transition participated in the process of identifying strengths, weaknesses, opportunities,
along with city representatives and relevant city experts.
and threats, along with city representatives and relevant city experts.

Figure
Figure 2.
2. The
The two
two Lighthouse
Lighthouse cities
cities of
of the
the POCITYF
POCITYF project,
project, Evora
Evora and
and Alkmaar.

2.1.2. Step 2: Key Objectives and Link to Policies—The Key Objectives Were Selected after a
Consultation Process with the Cities—Their Needs
In the smart city project POCITYF, in order to design a feasible action plan that can realize energy
transformation, the approach adopted was to decode and cluster the city needs identified in Step 1
and link them to supporting policies and frameworks. The decoding and clustering process was an

Smart Cities 2020, 3

610

2.1.2. Step 2: Key Objectives and Link to Policies—The Key Objectives Were Selected after a
Consultation Process with the Cities—Their Needs
In the smart city project POCITYF, in order to design a feasible action plan that can realize energy
transformation, the approach adopted was to decode and cluster the city needs identified in Step
1 and link them to supporting policies and frameworks. The decoding and clustering process was
an internal city process, which was performed with the support of the technical and city experts.
This process led to the definition of key objectives that could be addressed by a versatile energy
transition strategy covering aspects such as energy, mobility, ICT, waste, citizen engagement, and
specific solutions for historic cities. These aspects are certainly not exhaustive but cover to a great
extent the energy transformation focus sectors of European cities. The energy transition strategy was
structured in Energy Transition Tracks (ETTs). The term “ETT” is used to cluster complementary smart
novel solutions which define the objective they address [44].
2.1.3. Step 3: From High Objectives and Policies to Selecting City Specific Innovative Solutions
The process of identifying the needs of the cities led to key objectives which helped in defining a
clear strategy. The next step was to identify relevant solutions that would support the energy transition
goal while taking into account the city specific needs. The specific solutions have been carefully selected
by the two LH ecosystems after long discussions among the local authorities, energy and technology
providers, the citizens, and research organizations, with a view to select the most appropriate ones
addressing city needs and linking those to supportive frameworks, i.e., policies and initiatives, as
described in previous sections.
Following the identification of solutions, a survey with questionnaires was conducted at the
two ecosystems of Evora and Alkmaar to understand how the solutions providers defined the value
offered. Participants in the survey were asked to describe the value proposition for each solution
along with a linkage to potential addressable market needs. A market research was then conducted
to explore market needs and trends and verify that the solutions identified have the potential to
become sustainable business cases. The results are presented in Section 3.3.2. In order to allow for
comparison of the solutions to be implemented in other smart city projects, we proceeded to Step 4 for
understanding the underlying elements of value for each solution.
2.1.4. Step 4: Understanding Value Generated and How It Addresses the Market Needs
In order to better understand the potential of the innovative solutions to be widely deployed in
the market it is important to recognize the underlying attributes of value each solution can potentially
offer and then link this value to real market needs. To realize the above goal, we compared all proposed
solutions identified in POCITYF repository against elements of value according to the value pyramid of
Maslow [45]. Almquist et al. [45] identified 30 fundamental attributes of value, building upon Maslow’s
value pyramid, that fall into four categories of elements: (a) functional, (b) emotional, (c) life changing,
and (d) social impact. The functional element includes attributes like saving time, simplification,
making money, reducing risk, organizing, integrating, connecting, reducing effort, avoiding hassles,
reducing cost, improving quality, variety, sensory appeal, and informing. The emotional element
includes attributes like reducing anxiety, rewards, nostalgia, design/aesthetics, badge value, wellness,
therapeutic values, fun/entertainment, attractiveness, and accessibility. The life changing element
provides attributes like hope, self-actualization, motivation, heirloom, affiliation/belonging. Finally,
the social impact element includes the attribute of self-transcendence.
The solutions identified for realizing energy transition in the selected districts of the two LH cities
were assessed against the elements of value they address (Figure 3). A binary evaluation method was
applied by the authors, scoring “1” when a solution satisfied an attribute and “0” when a solution did
not satisfy an attribute. Then, for all solutions the frequency of satisfaction per attribute was calculated
by summing the instances of “1” and dividing the sum by the number of attributes for extracting
percentages. These percentages indicate the extent to which an attribute satisfies the selected solutions

for extracting percentages. These percentages indicate the extent to which an attribute satisfies the
selected solutions (e.g., 100% indicates that the specific attribute satisfies all solutions). All 11 authors
of this study have extensive experience and knowledge on smart city energy transition projects, urban
development, and energy technologies, and valued the solutions from a consumer perspective.
Although a different perspective (producers, municipality) would potentially lead to a different
Smart Cities 2020, 3
evaluation, such work is left for future research. Two rounds of evaluation were performed by each 611
expert to reach to a final converged decision. During the second round, the mean scores of the
opinions of the first round were available so that authors could revise their answer if needed, leading
(e.g., 100% indicates that the specific attribute satisfies all solutions). All 11 authors of this study have
to a more commonly accepted evaluation and final results.
extensive experience and knowledge on smart city energy transition projects, urban development, and
This procedure was followed by a ranking revealing the attributes which are satisfied more
energy technologies, and valued the solutions from a consumer perspective. Although a different
frequently by the solutions identified in the POCITYF repository. An example of how the most
perspective (producers, municipality) would potentially lead to a different evaluation, such work is
frequent attributes were derived for solutions in ETT#1 is provided in Appendix B. This approach, of
left for future research. Two rounds of evaluation were performed by each expert to reach to a final
comparing the solutions with the value elements of Maslow pyramid, is a practical exercise that
converged
During the second
the mean
scoresforms
of theofopinions
of the
roundthe
were
facilitates decision.
a deeper understanding
of theround,
underlying
powerful
value which
liefirst
towards
available
so
that
authors
could
revise
their
answer
if
needed,
leading
to
a
more
commonly
accepted
top of the pyramid combined with functional elements of value and can potentially foster user
evaluation
and
final efficiency
results. related solutions.
adoption of
energy

So
cia

l Im

pa
ct

Self-transcendence: Helping other people or society more broadly

Provides
Selfhope
actualization

Em
oti

on
al

Lif

ec

ha
ng
ing

SelfTranscendence

Fu
nc
tio
na
l

Reduces
effort

Motivation Heirloom

Affiliation &
belonging

Reduces Rewards Nostalgia Design / Badge
anxiety
me
aesthitics value

Wellness

Saves
time

Provides hope: Providing something to be optimistic about // Selfactualization: Providing a sense of personal accomplishment // Motivation:
Spurring people to achieve their goals // Heirloom: A good investment for
future generations // Affiliation and belonging: Helping people become
part of a group
Reduces anxiety: Helping people worry less and feel more secure //Rewards
me: Providing benefits for being a loyal customer //Nostalgia: Reminding
people of something positive in the past //Design/aesthetics: Providing an
appealing form or design // Badge value: Representing achieved status or
aspirations // Wellness: Improving peopleʹs physical or mental state //
Therapeutic value: Providing therapeutic value or well-being // Fun/
entertainment: Offering fun or entertainment // Attractiveness: Helping
people feel more attractive // Provides access: Providing access to
information, goods, services

Fun /
Therapeutic
Attractiveness Provides
value entertainment
access

Simplifies

Makes Reduces
Organizes Integrates Connects
money
risk

Avoids
hassles

Reduces
cost

Quality

Variety

Sensory
appeal

Informs

Saves time: Saving time in tasks or transactions // Simplifies: Reducing
complexity and simplifying // Makes money: Helping to make money //
Reduces risk: Protecting from losses // Organizes: Becoming more
organized // Integrates: Integrating different aspects of life // Connects:
Connecting with other people // Reduces effort: Getting things done with
less effort // Avoids hassles: Avoiding or reducing hassles // Reduces cost:
Saving money in purchases, fees or subscriptions // Quality: Providing highquality goods or services // Variety: Providing a variety of things to choose
from // Sensory appeal: Appealing in taste, smell, hearing and other
senses //Informs: Providing reliable and trusted information about a topic

Figure 3.
[45]).
Figure
3. Elements
Elementsofofvalue
value(adapted
(adaptedfrom
from
[45]).

This procedure was followed by a ranking revealing the attributes which are satisfied more
frequently by the solutions identified in the POCITYF repository. An example of how the most frequent
attributes were derived for solutions in ETT#1 is provided in Appendix B. This approach, of comparing
the solutions with the value elements of Maslow pyramid, is a practical exercise that facilitates a
deeper understanding of the underlying powerful forms of value which lie towards the top of the
pyramid combined with functional elements of value and can potentially foster user adoption of energy
efficiency related solutions.
3. Results
3.1. The SWOT Analysis for the Cases of Evora and Alkmaar
Evora represents South-European cities, which generally show lower investments in reducing
the footprint of their households and business sector, but can enjoy an abundant solar potential. The
climate of Évora is a typical Mediterranean climate according to the Köppen-Geiger classification, with
rainfall distributed throughout the year unevenly. The average annual temperature is around 16 ◦ C.
Evora is an historic town in the heart of the Alentejo region and is one of the largest municipalities
in Portugal, with 1307 km2 (5% of the region) and 56,596 inhabitants. Its well-preserved historical
city center is one of the richest monuments in Portugal, which earned the title of City-Museum. The
total amount of energy consumption in Evora is approximately 634,000 MWh/y. The top three energy
consuming sectors are transport (52%), housing (31%), and businesses and tertiary equipment (15%).
The majority of the building stock is composed of buildings built between 1981 and 1990, characterized
by inadequate thermal performance and high heat losses, whereas 25% of the total stock are in need of
repair or very degraded. Since 2012, Évora has been implementing its Sustainable Energy Action Plan
(SEAP) aiming at reducing its energy consumption, carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions, and sustainable
energy utilization by 20% in comparison with 1990 levels. The city has 31,000 domestic customers

Smart Cities 2020, 3

612

with installed smart meters; it also has an improved capability of RES and EV connections (EDP, Évora
Inovcity). Évora was selected because it complies with a set of criteria relevant to this experiment:
dimension, type of grid, national and international visibility, average level of consumption, inclusion
in the national pilot network of electric vehicle charging stations.
Alkmaar represents West-European cities strongly dependent on gas for electricity and heating.
Alkmaar has a temperate maritime climate under the influence of the North Sea and the warm Gulf
Stream. The average annual temperature in Alkmaar is 9.1 ◦ C. Alkmaar is an enterprising, modern city
with almost 108,000 inhabitants, 47,000 households, 8000 companies, and a workforce of about 52,000
people. The total amount of yearly energy consumption in Alkmaar is approximately 8000 TJ. The
top three energy consuming sectors are housing (38%), transport (31%), and businesses, commercial,
and public services (24%). The national government has decided that all homes in the Netherlands
must be natural gas-free by 2050. This is quite a challenging task for Alkmaar, where more than 23,000
buildings were built before 1975—and therefore poorly insulated—and 1/3 houses are privately-owned
rental houses. In the Netherlands, natural gas is largely used for space heating and warm water. The
Paris climate agreement was signed by the Dutch government on 28th June 2019 and forces the Dutch
government forward with the implementation of RES and the energy transition towards a natural
gas-free country. Moreover, the Dutch soil is burdened by a high amount of nitrogen composition in the
form of animal most. Nitrogen oxides are formed by burning engines, like motor vehicles and industry.
Mobility by road is responsible for 6% of the nitrogen damage to the environment. To maintain on a
sustainable way the fragile eco system, extensive emission reduction of nitrogen oxides is required.
The transition to e-mobility will further reduce the nitrogen issue.
Table 1 summarizes specific needs and challenges for implementing smart city solutions,
as identified by the two LHs local authorities (district-oriented).
Table 1. Specific needs and challenges identified by the two Lighthouse (LHs) cities.
Evora
•

•

•

Thepivotal goal towards decarbonization is the
increment of RES penetration, as well as other DER,
such as energy storage systems, and optimization of
electricity grid networks, actively controlling the
consumption and production of the pilot buildings.
Use the increase of DER penetration to obtain district
energy self-sufficiency. This enabled-flexibility can
also be used for peer-to-peer trading, congestion
management, and other non-frequency services to the
distribution system operators (DSO), in the wholesale
market (day-ahead and intraday) and even within the
ancillary services market.
In the buildings’ domain ranging from a set of
residential, commercial, and even mixed-use
buildings—composing the PEDs—the selected
solutions should achieve a high level of energy
efficiency and self-consumption. They should also be
endowed with the capacity to exchange energy
between them, as well as to export energy to the
upstream (distribution network) and downstream (EV
charging stations) systems. However, solar generation
needs to comply with the historical facades and legal
framework respecting cultural heritage.

Alkmaar
•

•

•

Informing and engaging citizens to
participate in the transition towards the
ambitious long-term goal of utilizing 100%
sustainable energy, free of natural gas by
2050 is a key challenge for Alkmaar.
The diversity in stakeholders and the
crucial role of citizens as enablers of the
energy transition. Many of the inhabitants
of pilot buildings are located in social
housing and thus often have a low-income.
Therefore, it is important to take
affordability into account, as well as
engaging inhabitants, and
behavior change.
To become an energy positive district, a
high penetration of renewables is
necessary, in addition to low energy
buildings and infrastructures. There is a
clear need for the integration of
decentralized renewable energy systems in
the district, making efficient use of space
and infrastructure.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

613

Table 1. Cont.
Evora
•

•

Alkmaar

From a transport viewpoint, the creation of new
smart parking, smart logistics’ routes, and EV
sharing platforms will reduce the GHG
emissions and reduce traffic. The increase in EV
adoption is a fundamental part of Evora’s
strategy, which will leverage from current
e-mobility initiatives and scale them up.
As a cross-cutting field, the ICT, from the
deployment of technologies such as AI and Big
Data algorithms to the integration of a city-level
platform (collecting and presenting, in a visual
attractive manner, the relevant data extracted
from the deployed services), will enable the
development of the Evora’s strategy in every
identified domain.

•

•

•

For high penetration of renewable electricity,
increasing the flexibility of the electricity grid is
essential. Therefore, demand response
management as well as integrating storage
capacity at district scale are necessary solutions.
In order to integrate energy efficiency solutions
and renewables with storage for grid flexibility
and sustainable mobility, integrated urban
planning methods and data sharing tools
are essential.
Data-based services for integrated urban district
planning, as well as a City information platform
(CIP) based on open specifications can be major
enablers to manage the successful
transformation towards intelligent, user-driven,
and demand-oriented infrastructures and
information services.

3.2. The Energy Transition Strategy for the Cases of Evora and Alkmaar
The energy transition strategy formed for POCITYF comprised four Energy Transition Tracks
(ETT#1–ETT#4). Together they provide a universal yet versatile framework to address both common
but also diversified needs and challenges of PEDs in smart cities. The four ETTs are linked with
four key objectives (Table 2), which serve common city needs and challenges, as imposed by the
current smart city strategies, legislative goals, policies on climate change, and decarbonization goals.
More specifically, each ETT attempts to address and be in line with the policy domains described
in Section 1.2, i.e., with positive energy buildings and districts deployment, developments in ICT
and P2P schemes, mobility, and citizen engagement. Within these ETTs, POCITYF seeks to enable,
demonstrate, replicate, and accelerate the roll out of a set of solutions built on top of both mature and
innovative technologies.
Table 2. Four key objectives (KOs) for smart city projects and POCITYF’s response.
S/N

Objective

POCITYF’s Response

1.

Demonstrate solutions at building and district level
that enable the increase of energy self-consumption,
energy savings, and high share of locally produced
renewable energy—leading to energy positive
districts.

ETT#1: Innovative Solutions for Positive
Energy Buildings and Districts.

2.

Demonstrate P2P energy management and storage
solutions supporting grid flexibility and curtailment
reduction.

ETT#2: P2P Energy Management and
Storage Solutions for Grid Flexibility.

3.

Demonstrate the integration of electro-mobility
solutions as an enabler to grid flexibility.

ETT#3: E-mobility Integration into
Smart Grid and City Planning.

4.

Demonstrate active citizen engagement services and
solutions providing an open innovation ecosystem
for citizens to participate in co-creation,
decision-making, planning, and problem solving
within the Smart Cities.

ETT#4: Citizen-Driven Innovation in
Co-creating Smart City Solutions.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

614

3.3. Identification of City Specific Innovative Solutions Satisfying Market Needs
3.3.1. Evora and Alkmaar Innovative Solutions for Realizing Their PEDs
As already mentioned, in this paper we present the repository of solutions that will be demonstrated
in the two LH cities of POCITYF and will also serve as a basis for FCs to realize comprehensive action
plans towards achieving their energy transition goals. In total 58 solutions have been extracted from
POCITYF’s repository and are presented in this study (Table 3)—21 are included in ETT#1 (separated
into four categories), 18 are included in ETT#2 (separated into five categories), 7 are included in ETT#3
(separated into three categories), and 12 are included in ETT#4 (separated into four categories). In
some cases, common solutions are applied in both LH cities. It should be mentioned that both the
categories presented below and all relevant solutions are not absolute, and each city should revise this
list based on its actual needs. However, it can serve as a great basis for action, since it offers a multitude
of solutions applicable to two varying city profiles (as described in Step 1). For instance, Evora will
implement a variety of solutions dealing with PV energy production due to its local climate, as well as
solutions that are highly compatible with its cultural heritage character [4]. Alkmaar, on the other hand,
is putting more emphasis on its district heating network (Evora does not have a district heating-cooling
(DHC) network) and EV penetration (imposed also by the strong EV charging infrastructure available
in the Netherlands). For those 58 smart and novel solutions identified in the POCITYF repository,
the questionnaire was completed by 12 partners in the ecosystem of Alkmaar and 14 partners in the
ecosystem of Evora.
Table 3. The repository of smart city solutions adopted in this study.
Evora Solutions

Alkmaar Solutions

RES generation (8)

Category

PV (crystalline silicon) glass//PV
canopies//PV skylights//Roof
integrated PV systems//PV roofing
shingles//Community Solar Farm.

Composite façades with
vertical solar panels//Hybrid
wind/solar generation system.

Smart energy
management, control,
and self-consumption (5)

Bidirectional Smart
Inverters//Energy
Routers//Building Management
Systems (BMS)//Positive
Computing Data Center.

Building/Home Energy
Management Systems
(BEMS/HEMS)

ETT#1
(Obj.1)

Building energy
efficiency (5)

ETT#2
(Obj.2)

Triple Glazing//PCM in the floor//Insulation with Circular
Materials//Thermo Acoustic Heat Pumps//Cascaded Heat Pumps

Sustainable waste
utilization and
management (3)

Pay-As-You-Throw (PAYT).

Reverse Collection of
Waste//Material Passports

Grid-Level Energy
Management (5)

Micro-grid controller
platform//Flexibility Control
Algorithms.

City Energy Management
System (CEMS)//Virtual Power
Plant (VPP)//DC grid

Sustainable Energy
Storage Systems (5)

LV and MV connected storage
systems//Freezing storage in
store//2nd Life Residential
Batteries.

Stationary batteries
(Li-ion)//Aquifer Thermal
Energy Storage (ATES)//2nd
Life Residential Batteries

Sustainable DHC
Networks (6)

ETT#3
(Obj.3)

DHC//Low temperature heat grid//Geothermal heat source//Low
temperature waste heat//Thermal grid controller//Heat Island
concept

P2P energy trading (1)

Peer to Peer Energy transactions.

-

Hydrogen Technologies
(1)

-

Fuel cells (hydrogen)

Vehicle to Grid (V2G)
and EV Charging
Infrastructure (4)

EV charging from PV
systems//Smart Lamp posts with
EV charging and 5G
functionalities.

EV charging from PV
systems//V2G//DC lighting
with EV charging

Smart Cities 2020, 3

615

Table 3. Cont.
Category

ETT#4
(Obj.4)

Evora Solutions

Alkmaar Solutions

Smart EV Charging (2)

EV charging management
platform

Intelligent and optimal control
algorithms

E-mobility Schemes (1)

EV Sharing

EV Sharing

Changing Energy
Behavior (4)

Gamification//Tourist
apps//Cultural experiences
marketplace//Energy consumption
monitoring, automation, and
control through mobile apps.

-

City Services
Infrastructures and
Systems (3)

City Information Platform//Wi-fi
data acquisition systems//Data
lake intelligence for positive
communities

City Information
Platform//Wi-fi data
acquisition systems//Data lake
intelligence for positive
communities

Fostering Energy related
Innovations (3)

Smart cloud for innovative
startups//Acceleration Programs
(i.e., Pocifest).

Governance innovation and
co-creation (i.e., TIPPING
approach)

Decision Support Tools
(2)

Design-based Value Mapping for
Communities.

Planning Urban
Transformation (i.e.,
Eco-Acupuncture)

3.3.2. Market Needs and Value Proposition of Solutions Grouped Under the 4 ETTs
Following the identification of solutions which can potentially have an impact on related policies
and in addressing the city specific needs decoded into the POCITYF objectives and aimed to be fulfilled
through the four (4) ETTs, the authors collated the market needs and trends with the value propositions
of the 58 solutions. In total, 26 partners in the two local ecosystems of Evora and Alkmaar answered
the questionnaire regarding the value proposition and addressable market needs. Market needs were
then also explored by the authors through extensive market research for all solutions identified in the
repository. The key current and future market needs that may influence the solutions’ implementation,
innovation, and value proposition are summarized per each category of the ETTs in Tables A1–A4,
placed in Appendix A due to size limitations. Emphasis was given to solutions that can facilitate
the deployment of PEDs. In almost all cases current market needs and future trends favored the
implementation and the scale-up of proposed solutions based on their value proposition. This further
supports the selection of the proposed solutions (step 3), which was performed building upon the
specific city needs (step 1) and specific objectives set to address those needs while linked with policies
and initiatives supporting the energy transition of cities (step 2). With a view to satisfy the special
needs of Evora and Alkmaar, the repository of solutions proposed along with the value propositions is
also fitted especially for old/protected buildings/areas, highly motivating cities with similar challenges
to move towards energy transition. However, different solutions serve different needs and generate
specific values. A one-size-fits-all solution cannot meet the versatile needs of smart cities [6] and it is
up to each city to define the most appropriate combination of solutions to achieve its energy transition
goals and serve its needs. A respective market research, although it requires regular updating, can also
support city authorities, decision-makers, and sustainability experts to identify and adopt a variety of
smart city solutions.
The market research, presented in Appendix A, revealed that the selection of solutions satisfied
one or more of the following: (a) novel technical characteristics and functionalities, the application
of which helps overcome implementation barriers (e.g., lack of space, minimum disruption during
installation, changing the appearance of buildings—especially old/protected ones, etc.) and/or reduce
energy costs; (b) the fact that novel technologies (e.g., energy storage systems, control equipment, EV
chargers) are becoming more and more affordable; (c) needs imposed by strategic goals and policies on
a local and national level (e.g., need to support stability of grid, reduce cost of energy, increased RES
and EV penetration, utilization of sustainable materials, decentralization of energy generation); and (d)

Smart Cities 2020, 3

616

the increasing need to motivate and more actively involve citizens in co-creating and implementing
solutions that can transform the energy profile of a city. The value proposition per solution, as reported
by the two local ecosystems of Evora and Alkmaar, are mostly focused on the technical/functionality
side, without excluding cases where impact on social aspects is of added value (e.g., increased aesthetics
and quality of life, supporting engagement, raising awareness).
3.4. Value Attributes According to Maslow’s Value Pyramid—Towards Sustainable Business Models
Creating value in a smart city means to bring together a large set of solutions able to address the
needs, expectations, and perceptions of its citizens [46]. In order to better understand what end users
would potentially value, before deciding to adopt the solutions identified in the Energy Transition
Tracks (ETT#1–ETT#4) of POCITYF, it was important to clarify what combination of underlying
value attributes are satisfied by each solution (step 4). This step facilitates and supports the design
and development of successful, appropriate, and sustainable business models that could foster user
adoption and stimulate demand [47], thus enabling roll out. Maslow’s theory suggests individuals can
be motivated by different and multiple priorities, but this is dependent on which of the “needs” have
already been satisfied [43]. The value proposition of the proposed solutions was used to figure out
which corresponding value attributes are satisfied by each of these solutions.
The higher frequency value attributes occurred within the repository of solutions under the four
ETTs were motivation, quality, integration for ETT1, cost reduction, quality, integration for ETT2
and ETT3, and the provision of information, organization, and integration for ETT4 (Table 4). The
attribute of quality (satisfied by the 90% of the solutions of ETT1 and ETT2) can improve customer’s
retention, facilitate brand building and trust [48] and ensure Return on Investment (ROI) [49].
Quality, although a functional characteristic, is a competitive element [50] that can affect purchasing
decisions [51]. Therefore, quality of smart city infrastructure and technology is a key element for the
successful provision and adoption of smart city services, taking into account the quality perspectives
of end-users [52]. A good illustration of this is that the city of San Diego in US is considered by the
Smart Cities journal as one of the top-ranked smart cities, because of the deployment of new innovative
technologies and solutions providing services of high quality, resulting also in exchanging information
and reducing cost [11]. People can be mobilized in regard to behavior change and acceptance of energy
technologies if they are offered high quality services. In that respect, POCITYF solutions exhibit strong
competition characteristics (Figure 4).
The attribute of motivation (satisfied by the 95% of the solutions for ETT1 and 92% for ETT4)
lies towards the top of the pyramid as it is a life changing attribute. People are motivated to adopt
sustainable energy innovations when the behavior can lead to both personal and collective benefits.
Besides those pertaining to one’s resources, like saving money, saving time, status improvement, as
well as sense of comfort and pleasure, people may also consider aspects focusing on the well-being of
others, city and society but also preserving nature and environment [53,54], thus resulting in positive
contribution. Comfort is the basic principle that motivates people and often it has a greater importance
than saving money, especially for higher income households [43].
The attribute of integration and cross-functionality of several energy systems and energy vectors
enables the multi-level operation and planning of energy systems across a broad range of functions in
order to deliver reliable, cost-effective energy services with low environmental impact [55]. Integration
of different aspects of life in solutions that facilitate energy efficiency is a key attribute in the energy
transition process. ICT for example, enables demand-response, real-time energy management, and
integration of intermittent and dispatchable renewable energy sources. Appropriate ICT solutions
can enhance network efficiency and improve overall system operation by matching local supply and
demand optimally [30].
The cost reduction attribute is linked to the cost-effective energy saving potential that is recognized
as a key driver for energy efficiency solutions. Consumer engagement and acceptance caused by
behavioral change is key to delivering energy savings [56], triggering energy consciousness and

Smart Cities 2020, 3

617

bringing up further cost-effective energy opportunities [57]. Local communities are well-placed to
bring people into full play towards the reduction of energy costs, CO2 emissions, and city resilience,
delivering targets based on local or regional energy needs [58]. Cost reductions can be achieved by
most of the clean energy solutions proposed by POCITYF. A more detailed breakdown on the most
frequent attributes of value recognized per ETT in the POCITYF repository of solutions is presented in
Appendix B. Percentages indicate the extent to which an attribute satisfies the selected solutions.
Table 4. Top-10 value attributes satisfied by the proposed solutions per Energy Transition Track (ETT).
Smart
Cities 2020, indicate
3 FOR PEER
Percentages
theREVIEW
extent to which an attribute satisfies the selected solutions.

14

ETT#2
%
ETT#3
%
ETT#4
%
can beETT#1
motivated by%different and
multiple priorities,
but
this is dependent
on which
of the “needs”
Innovative
P2P Energy
Citizen-Driven
have
already been satisfied [43].
The value propositionE-mobility
of the proposed solutions
was used to figure
Solutions for
Management
Integration into
Innovation in
out which corresponding value attributes are satisfied by each of these solutions.
Positive Energy
and Storage
Smart Grid and
Co-Creating
The higher
attributes
occurred within
the repository of solutions
under the four
Buildings
and frequency value
Solutions
for
City Planning.
Smart City
ETTsDistricts.
were motivation, quality,
for ETT2 and
Grid integration
Flexibility for ETT1, cost reduction, quality, integration
Solutions.
ETT3,
and
the
provision
of
information,
organization,
and
integration
for
ETT4
(Table
4).100
The
Motivation
95
Reduces cost
94
Reduces cost
100
Informs
attribute
of
quality
(satisfied
by
the
90%
of
the
solutions
of
ETT1
and
ETT2)
can
improve
customer’s
Quality
90
Quality
89
Integrates
86
Organizes
92
retention, facilitate brand building and trust [48] and ensure Return on Investment (ROI) [49].
Integrates
81
Integrates
78
Quality
86
Integrates
92
Quality, although a functional characteristic, is a competitive element [50] that can affect purchasing
Avoids Hassles
62
Providesofhope
Provides access
86
Reduces
decisions
[51]. Therefore,
quality
smart city78infrastructure
and technology
is a key cost
element for92the
Reduces cost
Motivation
72 services,
Provides
hopeinto account
71
Quality
92
successful
provision48
and adoption
of smart city
taking
the
quality perspectives
ofSelf-actualization
end-users [52]. A 48
good Avoids
illustration
of this is
the city of San Diego
is considered by92the
hassles
72 that Motivation
71 in US
Motivation
Smart
Cities journal48 as one
of the
cities,
because71of the
deployment
new
Heirloom
Reduces
risktop-ranked
50 smart
Reduces
effort
Provides
access of 92
innovative
technologies
and
solutions
providing
services
of
high
quality,
resulting
also
in
exchanging
Organizes
43
Variety
50
Design/aesthetics
57
Self-actualization
83
information and reducing cost [11]. People can be mobilized in regard to behavior change and
Makes money
43
Organizes
44
Simplifies
57
Connects
83
acceptance of energy technologies if they are offered high quality services. In that respect, POCITYF
Provides hope
38 competition
Simplifies characteristics
39
Avoids
57
Avoids hassles
75
solutions
exhibit strong
(Figurehassles
4).

Figure
Word
cloudofofvalue
valueattributes
attributes for
for the
the smart
smart city
with
bigger
Figure
4. 4.
Word
cloud
citysolutions
solutionsofofPOCITYF—values
POCITYF—values
with
bigger
font
indicate
higher
satisfaction.
font indicate higher satisfaction.

Energy
efficiency
investments
require
greater
adoption
from
The attribute
of motivation
(satisfied
by the
95% ofawareness,
the solutionsengagement,
for ETT1 and and
92% for
ETT4) lies
citizens
[59].
Communicating
for
informing
the
public
and
other
stakeholders
about
the
benefits
towards the top of the pyramid as it is a life changing attribute. People are motivated to adopt
sustainable
energy
innovations
when
the behavior
can lead tomethods
both personal
andbuild
collective
benefits.
of the
solutions
and the
drawbacks
of existing
non-sustainable
can help
acceptance
and
Besidestrust
those
pertaining
to one’sof
resources,
saving money,
time,
status
improvement,
increase
and
understanding
city levellike
decisions
[60]. Atsaving
the same
time,
informed
citizensascan
well
as senselocal
of comfort
and pleasure,
may also
consider
aspects focusing
on the
well-being
lead
organized
or renewable
energy people
cooperatives
that
can collectively
take action
towards
energy
of
others,
city
and
society
but
also
preserving
nature
and
environment
[53,54],
thus
resulting
in
efficiency [61].
positive
contribution.
Comfort is the Solutions
basic principle
that motivates
and often
it has a greater
Results
for ETT#1—"Innovative
for Positive
Energypeople
Buildings
and Districts”
highly
importance
than
saving
money,
especially
for
higher
income
households
[43].
outline that the proposed solutions offer motives for their adoption and high-quality services towards
attribute
of integration
and in
cross-functionality
of several
energy systems
and energy
vectors
energy The
efficiency.
Solutions
included
ETT#1 are focused
on: (a) facilitating
and spurring
citizens/city
enables the multi-level operation and planning of energy systems across a broad range of functions
authorities to achieve significant energy savings on both building and district level while reducing
in order to deliver reliable, cost-effective energy services with low environmental impact [55].
their energy bills (energy efficiency first); (b) removing barriers for enabling a high share of locally
Integration of different aspects of life in solutions that facilitate energy efficiency is a key attribute in
the energy transition process. ICT for example, enables demand-response, real-time energy
management, and integration of intermittent and dispatchable renewable energy sources.
Appropriate ICT solutions can enhance network efficiency and improve overall system operation by
matching local supply and demand optimally [30].
The cost reduction attribute is linked to the cost-effective energy saving potential that is

Smart Cities 2020, 3

618

produced/consumed renewable energy on building and district level. Innovative solutions to be
demonstrated and replicated include both positive energy building (level) retrofits and positive
energy district level retrofits. The fitting of these two levels of retrofits, on the principles of circular
economy, is considered as well with the utilization of available waste streams and waste management
schemes. Most of the solutions in this ETT (as well the other ETTs) are of an integrated nature [2],
serving multiple functionalities (e.g., RES generation and insulation properties) and/or can be easily
customized and combined with other elements (e.g., bidirectional smart inverters, energy routers)
serving cross-functional needs.
Solutions included in ETT#2—"P2P Energy Management and Storage Solutions for Grid Flexibility”
and ETT#3—"E-mobility Integration into Smart Grid and City Planning” are of utmost importance
with respect to reducing costs when targeting services related with sustainable energy and mobility.
Solutions included in ETT#2 focus on: (a) maximizing self-consumption, (b) reducing grid stress and
avoiding load and generation curtailment, and (c) increasing the financial value through providing
flexibility services to the grid. The end result of all these solutions is reducing costs, either in the
form of lower energy prices or indirectly due to energy savings. A better, safer, and environmentally
conscious energy network increases social coherence and provides hope towards the achievement of
climate change goals. Solutions included in ETT#3 focus on individual elements, such as those of
(a) reducing the impact of electro-mobility on the energy system, (b) increasing the penetration of
e-vehicles utilizing RES, but with the additional benefits they can offer when utilized to support grid
flexibility, while reducing curtailment, thus leading to better quality energy network, (c) promoting
decarbonization of the mobility sector (with the adoption of EVs), and (d) reducing citizens’ mobility
costs (no use of liquid fossil fuels and better traffic management). Additionally, the integration of
solutions in this ETT provides access to otherwise non-available information (e.g., operational issues
on charging stations, controllability of EVs, grid flexibility) facilitating the deployment of PEDs.
Solutions included in ETT#4—"Citizen-Driven Innovation in Co-creating Smart City Solutions”
focus primarily on improving citizens’ quality of life and increasing city efficiency and governance by
involving citizens in the early development, design, and evaluation phases of the solutions and related
services following the principles of the “Rapid Prototyping” approach. This is a process of creating
a quick mockup and testing of solutions through an interaction layer with the citizens, followed by
a simultaneous and almost real-time feedback by them; thus, ensuring a constant improvement of
the solutions and/or the services provided to them. Such an approach can: (a) motivate citizens for
co-creating, co-delivering, and co-capturing value through the smart city solutions demonstrated;
(b) create an open innovation ecosystem between different experimentation set-ups; (c) empower
consumers to become ‘prosumers’ by enabling them to monetize any excess of electricity (generated
by rooftop solar, for example) by securely recording data and sending and receiving payments
automatically. Solutions included in ETT#4 highly satisfy a multitude of value attributes (information,
organization, integration, reduction of costs, quality). All of them, though, have a highly informative
role providing reliable information to stakeholders and end users. It is important to highlight that this
information could be a great starting point for the successful replication of most of the demonstration
activities in the ecosystems of FCs. The findings are directly in line with POCITYF objectives and
illustrate the nexus between the market needs and the offered value of the proposed solutions derived
from the methodology applied for the two LHs.
4. Conclusions and Further Considerations
This study confirmed that energy-efficiency investments, especially for solutions on energy
management, storage, grid flexibility, and e-mobility (ETT#2 and ETT#3), tend to have a specific
economic profile, as the return on investment is ensured, in many cases, through energy savings and
not through an increase in revenues [58]. Furthermore, the integration of various systems which
manage to break vertical silos can result in high-quality services, motivating users to participate in
a collective effort for realizing energy efficiency from which different stakeholders and citizens can

Smart Cities 2020, 3

619

directly benefit (ETT#1–ETT#4). Those key attributes of value identified for POCITYF repository of
solutions can be directly linked to the development or adaptation of successful value propositions
that respond to market needs and can form the basis for forming sustainable business models that can
facilitate user adoption and thus roll-out of solutions for the two LH cities but also the FCs.
The process, namely steps 1–3, followed in this study can inform and facilitate the city and its
stakeholders in forming a repository of appropriate and relevant solutions that can be applied to
address city-specific needs towards its energy transition path. Different repositories with a different
mix of solutions that enable energy transition and positiveness either at district or city level can be
formed by different cities. Step 4 is an essential step to inform the process of building successful value
propositions that will lead to sustainable business models of solutions by recognizing the attributes of
value that the integrated solutions offer to citizens and design communication campaigns with simple,
concrete, credible, and with emotional appeal messages [60]. What is important to highlight is that no
solution alone, but a combination of integrated solutions, can holistically address the identified and
versatile needs of cities and their users, and can synthesize important attributes of value that respond
to city needs [62]. This synthesis can act as a multiplier facilitating value capture, and in turn attract
the interest of investors, mobilize financing, and new revenue streams. However, the process of energy
transition can commence with the prerequisite that there is political will and support for the realization
of energy efficient related investments, with the aim to attain energy efficiency goals and increase
quality of life for citizens, something that needs to be proactively and adequately communicated to
citizens and stakeholders for avoiding stalling or reversing much-needed reforms.
A limitation of this study is that the repositories of solutions assessed for their value attributes
do not represent conclusive lists of solutions but solutions that were selected as being relevant and
appropriate for demonstration according to the specific needs of the two cities of Evora and Alkmaar
when planning the realization of their Positive Energy Districts. However, in both repositories the main
attributes of value proved to be similar. A recommendation for further research is then to assess other
repositories of solutions for whether they fulfill the value chain of quality, motivation, integration, cost
reduction, information, and organization as key pillars and model the linkage of those values with
the business models developed and the associate revenue streams. Additionally, the value attributes
of each solution were evaluated by the authors (with a long experience, expertise, and knowledge
on smart city energy transition projects) as a first iteration of the interaction required with potential
consumers. However, the process of validating the value attributes requires more iterations with end
users to ensure that their needs are considered. Consumers who will be the end-users of the systems
should be further explored when the solutions and the respective systems will be in operation. Other
perspectives, i.e., the technology providers or city authorities, could be explored in future research.
However, the specific process was performed building upon the value propositions as provided by the
technology providers and the market research, thus reflecting, as far as possible, actual market needs.
Author Contributions: The present article is addressed by the X authors mentioned, each of whom being
responsible for various aspects of the work. Specifically for: conceptualization, P.G., K.A., V.A., and K.K.;
methodology, K.A. and P.G.; validation, P.G., V.A., K.A., and K.K.; formal analysis, P.G., V.A. and K.A.; investigation,
P.G., V.A., K.A. and K.K.; resources N.N.; data curation, P.G., V.A., K.A., K.K., F.F., and K.V.; writing—original
draft preparation, P.G., V.A., K.A. and K.K.; writing—review and editing P.G., V.A., K.A., K.K., N.N., V.S., F.F., S.B.,
K.V., J.M.C., and J.F.; supervision, N.N., S.B., and J.F.; funding acquisition, N.N., P.G., K.A., J.M.C. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the POCITYF project (A positive energy city transformation framework),
Grant agreement number 864400, which received funding from the European Union ’s framework program
Horizon 2020 for research and innovation. This APC is free of charge after the cordial invitation of Traey Wu to
Paraskevi Giourka.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the local ecosystems partners of Evora and Alkmaar for
participating and completing the survey.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

620

Appendix A
Table A1. Innovative solutions for positive energy buildings and districts (Obj.1–ETT#1).
Category

RES generation (fitted for
old/protected buildings/areas)

Current and Future Market Needs
•Architectural constraints (e.g., appearance of the
building cannot change, the weight of the structure
cannot be increased) especially in old/protected
buildings/areas pose significant barriers for the
installation of conventional RES systems, thus there is a
need for customizable and integrated solutions;
•Building-integrated PVs (BIPVs) are gaining
popularity among construction stakeholders;
•Increased aesthetics of PV systems can support their
acceptance, especially when installed in public spaces;
•EV market is experiencing a rapid growth and
building/district-level RES can satisfy the needs of the
charging points for EVs;
•During the last years, extra emphasis has been put on
developing construction materials/systems that are
characterized by quicker installation times, thus
decreasing costs and impact during installation as well
as minimizing disturbance of the occupants;
•Hybrid energy generation systems are gaining
popularity, since they can help overcome otherwise
unsurpassed barriers (e.g., low sunshine for an
extended period in the case of PV systems);
•In urban areas and close to urban areas there is
resistance of residents against windmills. Wind energy
is associated with noise pollution and loss of visual
amenity;

Type of Solution

Brief Description and Value Proposition

PV (crystalline
silicon) glass

BIPV glass-glass//Can substitute any regular glass, changing
the way we design buildings//Lets natural light in//Provides
thermal and sound insulation//Filters most of harmful
UV//Ease of customization, especially in terms of
shape//Crystalline silicon glass can yield twice as much energy
as amorphous silicon glass//Aesthetically attractive.

PV canopies

Photovoltaic canopies for RES generation//Sun protection
and shelter//Depending on the type of canopy, the electricity
yielded can be consumed in different ways: self-consumption
for surrounding buildings, lighting, ad-box illumination,
back-up systems, charging point for EVs, injection to the
grid//Various design options (multiple slopes, different tilts and
orientations, multiple glass design options etc.).

PV skylights

BIPV skylights for RES generation//Let natural light
in//Provide bioclimatic properties of thermal comfort to the
building//Filter UV and infrared rays//PV skylights achieve
competitive IRR and offer appealing payback times.

Roof-integrated
PV systems

BIPV systems used on roofs//Usually light roofing
element//Offer waterproofing without the need of torch on
asphalt membrane or other waterproofing
membranes//Possibility of installation on pitch roof//Can be
made of triple-junction thin-film amorphous silicon, converting
a broader spectrum of light into electricity than conventional
modules.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

621

Table A1. Cont.
Category

Current and Future Market Needs
•The deployment of hybrid wind/solar generation
systems is becoming more and more economically
appealing, since the upfront costs are continuously
reduced (until now hybrid systems were characterized
by comparatively very high costs for each kWh
produced).
•Although there is a clear need for RES generation on a
local level, this may not be the case for many
buildings/districts where there is simply not enough
space and the conditions to install PV systems.
Increasing RES penetration in these cases is very
challenging (reaching positiveness seems like an
impossible task to accomplish). As a result, there is a
need to provide solutions that can enable everyone to
invest in RES if we are looking towards just energy
transition.

Type of Solution

Brief Description and Value Proposition

PV roofing
shingles

PV roofing shingles combining the functionality of tiles
with PV technology//Thermal inertial properties typical of
terracotta//The cables arrangement can be optimized,
improving installation speed//Snap-on multi-contact fixtures
make the replacement of modules quick and easy even by
non-experts//Installation does not require tubs and/or fixing
brackets (no thermal bridges)//The appearance of the building
remains unchanged.

Composite façades
with vertical solar
panels

Vacuum composite facade panels with insulation and
composite façade with solar cells (combining insulation and
electricity production)//A lot of unused façade surface of
residential buildings (passive facades) can become useful to
produce solar energy (active facades)//Multipurpose.

Hybrid wind/solar
generation system

An innovative combination of urban wind and solar
production system that can be installed on top of
buildings//Takes advantage of natural strong airflow by wind
over high-rise buildings to generate wind energy//More
constant energy production (night-wind/day-solar)//Can be
modified architecturally (color, shape)//Aesthetically attractive.

Community Solar
Farm

Innovative compensation model that allows citizens that
live in old protected areas to invest in renewable generation
placed in PV plants in the outskirts of the city, via a virtual
energy wallet//Allows the injection of renewable energy from
places where more space is available.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

622

Table A1. Cont.
Category
Smart energy
management, control,
and self-consumption

Current and Future Market Needs
•The coordinated operation of RES production and
supporting storage systems can increase the flexibility
of the grid, and since the RES penetration will be
increasing, there will be a stronger need for
technologies/products that can serve this functionality;
•Growing need for technologies and solutions that can
support the stability of the power networks and
simplify the integration of renewables in existing power
systems, avoiding and/or limiting expensive and
inefficient investments on new grid infrastructures as
far as possible;
•New business opportunities are expected for energy
communities, acting as aggregators as well, investing in
renewable production, storage devices, and providing
ancillary services;
•Increasing need for non-invasive solutions capable of
preserving the historical structures of buildings;
•Increasing need for solutions with the final goal of
saving energy, while increasing occupants’ comfort;
•Lack of integrated smart building/home solutions with
reasonable cost;
•Massification of smart building technologies is
expected due to the introduction of the smart readiness
indicator (EPBD).
•The increasing usage of cloud-based technologies
increases the pressure in energy grid supplying
Datacenter facilities, making it fundamental to make
operations more efficient and capable to adapt to
growing needs;

Type of Solution

Brief Description and Value Proposition

Bidirectional
Smart Inverters

A single device for improving flexibility and controllability
of multiple energy assets//Rich user interface//Intelligent
optimization of yield and self-consumption//Improvement
regarding RES cut-off due to network congestion.

Energy Routers

A device for the integration of energy components and
optimally managing the energy flux between them//Modular
design and increased interoperability capabilities//Can act as a
major component in the grid/consumer energy interface, being
responsible for grid-to-grid communication.

Building
Management
Systems (BMS)

Fundamental pieces of a building technological
infrastructures, as they act as central or distributed
controllers of the different building systems//Real time
monitoring and management of HVAC, lighting, energy
consumption/production, and/or other
systems/devices//Reduction of energy consumption of
buildings - energy savings//Optimization of indoor comfort for
occupants and usability of the building//Services built around
the BMS infrastructure (e.g., maintenance, smart workspaces).

Building/Home
Systems being able to forecast the local energy production,
Energy
detect consumption profiles, and establish an optimal
Management
energy-related building operation//Improved flexibility and
Systems(BEMS/HEMS)controllability of residential and commercial buildings//Rich
user interface and user experience//Intelligent techniques (incl.
forecasting) to optimize energy usage and comfort
preferences//Provide added-value services for electric
grid//Self-learning systems.
Positive
Computing Data
Center

Innovative methodologies, processes, and equipment
improving the energy efficiency of data centers//Improve the
ratio of total amount of energy used by a computer data facility
to the energy delivered to computing equipment.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

623

Table A1. Cont.
Category

Energy efficiency

Current and Future Market Needs
•Increasing need for better performant, greener
insulation materials and systems, since energy
efficiency should come first before moving to the
installation of RE production systems;
•Insulation of sound is also a significant aspect;
•Extremely high renovation potential in EU;
•Using Phase Change Materials gave way to unique
applications of heating/cooling solutions—their
commercial use has only been recently unlocked due to
their high production and encapsulation costs until now;
•Technologies and services that can facilitate the
transition from a linear to a circular economy are
already becoming a necessity if we are looking towards
sustainable urban development. This is possible by
making more use of circular recyclable materials. This is
becoming increasingly important with renovation and
new construction projects;
•For climates with moderate heating and cooling needs,
heat pumps offer an energy-efficient (and usually
cost-efficient) alternative to furnaces and air
conditioners. The market needs the heat pumps to be
smaller and lighter, to be integrated in the facades.

Type of Solution

Brief Description and Value Proposition

Triple Glazing

Triple glazing with low solar entry factor (G-value)//Sound
insulation//A special seam and crack seal can be used in the
window frames to minimize the infiltration of cold air in
comparison with the standard values (NEN 2686).

PCM in the floor

Floor insulation utilizing PCM materials that absorbs heat
and stores it//Functions as thermal battery//Re-uses waste
heat//More stable climate and higher comfort.

Insulation with
Circular Materials

Replacement of conventional insulation materials with
circular materials such as flax, linseed//Retain high insulation
properties//By using used or natural materials, there is a
substantial reduction in CO2 emissions, partly because no new
raw materials are mined

Thermo Acoustic
Heat Pumps

Electrical driven thermo-acoustic heat pumps are closed
systems that are filled with Helium under pressure, utilizing
acoustic waves to pump heat//Can operate over a large range
of (high) temperatures and can achieve large temperature
lifts//Energy needs reduction//Can be integrated in facades//Act
both as booster and as part of an integrated hybrid
heating/cooling system.

Cascaded Heat
Pumps

Cascades of small heat pumps are utilized to increase
performance and flexibility due to increased
modularity//Can be combined with PV-thermal panels to
create an integrated high-efficient hybrid heating concept.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

624

Table A1. Cont.
Category
Sustainable waste
utilization and
management

Current and Future Market Needs

Type of Solution

Brief Description and Value Proposition

•As population rises, more materials/products are
consumed, and thus more waste is produced—making
efficient waste management a necessity for sustainable
development;
•To reduce the environmental and health impacts of
waste and to improve resource efficiency, there is a
growing need for different, more efficient, and dynamic
waste collection systems and motivated people,
knowing what, how, and why it should be done;
•The growing awareness and pressure for changing our
habits, so that they are increasingly sustainable, requires
a change in the way we produce and treat the waste.
•Raw materials are scarce. In order to keep materials
available indefinitely, they need to be reused, and their
use must be documented;
•Re-used material could offer financial and
environmental benefits compared to newly bought
materials, e.g., less transport movements, less use of
water, electricity, and other resources, CO2 reduction,
job potential.

Pay-As-You-Throw
(PAYT)

A ready-to-use solution that lets municipalities track their
citizens’ waste production levels//State-of-the-art technology
applied to common municipal waste containers and a
management platform, allowing the monitoring of the amount
of urban waste deposited, the creation of multiple profiles and
permission levels, optimizing the collection routes, configuring
alerts, and giving access to the collected data//Change behavior
of citizens.

Reverse Collection
of Waste

A novel waste collection scheme, characterized by the
separate collection of each re-usable commodity at different
moments, instead of collecting mixed garbage by the
garbage truck every week//Re-usable commodities can be
used to create new products. Less raw material has to be used
and/or less new material has to be fabricated (energy saving,
environmental saving, emission saving, etc.).

Material Passports

A tool for mapping material streams//Gives insight into the
materials used to create a building, and into their
quantities//Contains information on the quality of materials,
their location, and their monetary and circular value//It
becomes a lot easier to reuse materials, minimize waste, and to
reduce the cost of material consumption//Improved insight into
the use of material will stimulate the circular economy.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

625

Table A2. Peer-to-Peer (P2P) energy management and storage solutions for grid flexibility (Obj.2–ETT#2).
Category

Grid-Level Energy
Management

Current and Future Market Needs

Type of Solution

Value Proposition

•As the penetration of RES into the market is rising, the
demand for controlling platforms to maintain power load
stability and increase grid flexibility is increasing. Such
solutions can introduce into the market novel services for
grid support;
•The lack of DERs for controllability and the integration
of resources controlled by end-consumers contribute
greatly to the need;

Micro-grid controller
platform

A grid level management platform that uses advanced
distribution management and control strategies//Offers
high level control authority allowing for optimal RES
integration//Supports prosumers in grid
operation//Allows the provisioning of flexibility and
market services using RES forecasting, DERs, energy
models and load estimation tools//Offers improved
flexibility and controllability of energy
resources//Interface that allows controlling existing assets
of DSOs.

•The time variability of RES and electrification of energy
demand increase the need for demand-side management
(DSM) measures at different levels of power systems;
•The need to modify energy consumption in real time can
also be identified in other energy systems, e.g., peak
demand reduction in district heating;
•Need to implement DSM measures while respecting
users’ comfort needs and preferences.

Flexibility Control
Algorithms

Flexibility Control Algorithms that use the energy
flexibility provided by different types of controllable
devices//Bringing benefits for both consumers (e.g., lower
energy costs) and power systems operators (e.g., lower
peak loads)//Energy performance improvement at
building and district level//Energy flexibility (e.g.,
appliances and batteries)//Self-consumption
improvement//Satisfying the comfort needs and
preferences of consumers.

•Opportunities of flexible energy management are great
both for commercial and residential consumers. As RES
and smart grids occupy larger shares of the market, such
management is required in order to outperform
centralized energy distribution and control.
•The CEMS can introduce enhanced flexibility and
controllability that will allow the further penetration of
RES and smart grids into a city’s energy system.

City Energy Management
System (CEMS)

City Energy Management System used by power
system operators to monitor, control, and manage
energy while allowing end users to control smart
devices, unlocking the opportunities of flexible
energy//Ensures a smart global management through
relevant manufacturers devices//Ease of use//Can
determine power generation or power demands that
minimize a certain objective such as power loss//The
Energy Flexibility Interface (EFI) included in the CEMS
provides additional aid on Smart Grid Management.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

626

Table A2. Cont.
Category

Sustainable Energy
Storage Systems

Current and Future Market Needs

Type of Solution

Value Proposition

•Changes in the dynamics of power grids from
centralized to distributed, moderating costs, and easy
accessibility of energy storage are some of the factors
driving the growth of the VPPs.
•Total annual VPP vendor revenue will grow from $1.1B
in 2014 to $5.3B in 2023 [63]. VPPs influence multiple
markets simultaneously due to their integrated character;
•Small units can get access to lucrative markets that they
would not be able to enter individually. Small facilities,
owned by SMEs or even households, have the ability to
become prosumers [64].

Virtual Power Plant (VPP)

VPP is a virtual power network that links
decentralized units and operates as a single centralized
control system where the power and flexibility of the
aggregated assets can be traded collectively.
Non-physical (hence virtual) aggregation of several
heterogeneous Distributed Renewable Energy Resources
(DRERs)//Cost-effective alternative to complement the
power mismatch due to intermittent RE
generation//Avoids expensive upgrades to the network
infrastructure//Exploitation of the aggregated power
mitigates the impact of electricity price
fluctuations//Relieving the load on the grid by smartly
distributing the power during peak load periods.

•Growing demand for electricity requires measures to
control energy losses as well as to reduce the economic
and ecological footprint of this transition. The market
needs efficient and cleaner decentralized energy supply
grids [65].
•EMS, renewable systems, storage, and low carbon
applications are changing the market landscape,
potentially leading to a transition from an AC-dominated
grid market to a DC one.

DC grid

Direct Current Electricity Grid Infrastructure.
Electronic Waste reduction//Lower losses and Higher
Transmission Capacity for the facilitation of production,
storage and distribution of solar electricity than
traditional AC networks//Better connection with
intelligent control technology and batteries for achieving
energy efficiency and optimal zone distribution in
buildings.

•In the industrial/services and large consumers market,
storage solutions provide with backup and uninterrupted
energy supply services, as well as implementing
intelligent energy management strategies such as peak
shaving or ramp rate control.
•For grid operators and utilities these solutions provide
effective tools to manage and control power quality in the
grid (MV).

Low Voltage (LV) and
Medium Voltage (MV)
connected storage systems

Integrated Low-voltage and Medium-Voltage electric
energy storage battery systems//Scalability of power and
capacity//Ease of implementation and integration into
existing electrical networks//Allowing to deal with
increasing RES and their inherent variability//Multitude
of offered services, i.e., peak-shaving, reactive power
compensation, RE self-consumption maximization, power
quality management and control etc.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

627

Table A2. Cont.
Category

Current and Future Market Needs

Type of Solution

Value Proposition

•Batteries will play a crucial role in enabling the next
phase of the transition towards renewables. As more and
more households have adopted PV systems, battery
system integration can provide self-sufficiency and
reduce the monthly electricity bills. The economic benefit
is thus the driving force of the technology in an
expanding market.

Stationary
batteries(Li-ion)

Innovative Lithium-ion Stationary Battery
Systems//Increased storage capacity//Energy cost
reduction//Contribution to advanced load
balancing//On-demand-emergency discharging
capabilities//Ensuring power availability and power
quality within the building (e.g., during
blackouts)//Improving comfort and prolonging the
lifespan of indoor devices.

•It is critical to find solutions that can either substitute
Li-ion batteries and/or extend their productive life; the EV
battery supply market will undergo a major expansion
over the coming years, which is also expected to affect
material demand and increase price pressure [66].

2nd Life Residential
Batteries

Modular and mobile (smaller) battery system that
re-uses Li-Ion battery modules coming from
EVs//Re-purposes Li-Ion battery modules (dealing with
the upcoming wave of obsolete electric vehicle (EV)
batteries)//Extends the productive life of EV battery
modules//Affordable.

•With the proliferation of self-consumption generation,
an efficient energy management leads to energy cost
savings and more efficient use of energy (particularly in
large facilities—stores where energy consumption is
higher, thus its impact).
•At periods where energy demand is higher than supply
it is of extreme relevance that consumers can shift, curtail,
or switch off energy demand.

Freezing storage in store

Energy storage system from HVAC or industrial
freezers in retail stores//Energy consumption reduction
for stores//Energy cost reduction//Leveraging thermal
inertia of the freezers//Providing demand side flexibility
services to the grid//Complying to pre-established criteria
of comfort and safety//Optimization of energy
management based on daily consumption profile;
intraday energy cost variation; and PV generation.

•There is a high need for replacing traditional fossil
fuel-dependent heating and cooling systems with
sustainable ones;
•During recent years aquifer thermal energy storage
(ATES) has gained a lot of attention and the number of
ATES is increasing, especially in Europe [67].

Aquifer Thermal Energy
Storage

An innovative system for heat/cold storage in the
ground//Sustainable thermal storage solution that takes
advantage of otherwise wasted heat streams to provide
heating and cooling to the buildings in a cost-effective
way (also reducing associated CO2
emissions)//Characterized by lower costs due to peak
shavings and lower energy use.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

628

Table A2. Cont.
Category

Current and Future Market Needs

Type of Solution

Value Proposition

DHC

Sustainable DHC
Networks

•There is a growing need to help cities upgrade their
DHC energy systems (in many cases being outdated),
especially for coal regions in transition;
•DHC systems can utilize waste, geothermal heat, and
surplus heat which increase a region’s security of energy
supply.

Connection to the district heating (both at high and at
low(er) temperatures) which distributes heat from a
biomass energy plant, which runs on (municipal waste)
wood, and in a later stage the district heating will be
connected with geothermal energy sources//Outcomes
and lessons learned from this process can provide
valuable insights for the upgrade of DHC of other cities in
EU.

•The need for a green-based economy not only propels
the growth of the district heating market but also imposes
market related needs such as energy efficiency and quick
transition to RES.
•Future initiatives towards better insulation and a
growing insulation market favor the further penetration
of such solutions into the market.

Low temperature heat
grid

Low Temperature (80/85) Heat Network.
Cost-effective//Enhanced flexibility in the network
design//Lower heat losses//Offering greater possibility for
RES penetration into the heat grid (such as geothermal
heat sources)// Separating the indoor installation from the
heat network, which is safer in the event of leaks, lower
water pressure in the home, limit-arrange return
temperature.

•Global targets for climate change mitigation and
decarbonization require higher RES penetration,
reliability and energy efficiency of DHC systems.

Geothermal heat source

Geothermal Heating Distribution Network for
Buildings. Low Environmental Impact//High Energy
Efficiency//Reliable//Clean heat source with energy
transfer from the earth//Typically require little
maintenance.

•Various waste heating technologies are launched in the
market to support smart city concept and eco-friendly
development to sustain the environment.

Low temperature waste
heat

Small-scale waste heat recovery network//Heating cost
reduction//Waste heat recovery//Energy consumption
reduction//Optimal heat distribution to customers.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

629

Table A2. Cont.
Category

P2P energy trading

Current and Future Market Needs

Type of Solution

Value Proposition

•Configuration and maintenance of traditional heating
installations is cumbersome, leading to malfunctioning,
inefficiencies, and economic losses throughout their
lifetime, routinely spanning several decades. With the
introduction of 4th generation DHC Networks, the need
for designing optimal controlling algorithms increases
[68].
•Delivering heat electrification requires dynamic,
real-time demand-supply matching solutions where the
interplay between heat and electricity is considered.

Thermal grid controller

A thermal heat controlling software that saves
operational costs//Cost reduction//Energy savings//Ease
of planning and configuration process//Optimal balance
between producers (supply) and consumers (demand) of
heat and cold//Highly scalable, allowing systems of
hundreds or thousands of producers and consumers to be
controlled in an efficient way//Adaptable in the available
buffer capacity and flexibility that different heating
system components offer//Real-time matching solution for
heating and cooling systems

•The Urban Heat Island effect results in increasing
cooling and electricity energy needs, increased thermal
stress, and heat-related public health issues, as well as
human comfort and environmental implications [69].

Heat Island concept

Innovative Energy Management System for Heating
Optimal energy distribution and management at building
level//Increased heating efficiency//Energy
savings//Algorithmic-based alignment of production and
use of electricity between the several connected products.

•Increased population of energy prosumers leads to P2P
energy transactions needs;
•Need for universal access to affordable, fairly priced,
and abundant energy;
•Take control and responsibility for the self-provision of
energy needs allowing the possibility to produce and sell
own electricity creating investment opportunities, which
can enhance energy equity.

Peer to Peer Energy
transactions

A digital fundraising and P2P energy transactions
platform. Provides energy services for the end user and
makes the renewable energy sources and energy storage
more attractive to end users//Facilitates virtual energy
communities for energy sharing (solar sharing—i.e., for
cultural heritage communities where solar power at
residential level may not be an option).

Smart Cities 2020, 3

630

Table A2. Cont.
Category
Hydrogen
Technologies

Current and Future Market Needs
•The demonstration of a complete hydrogen-based fuel
cell system that can supplement the existing grid can
facilitate larger-scale penetration of this technology to the
existing energy market.
•The hydrogen fuel cell vehicle market size is projected to
grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 66.9%
from 2019 to 2026 [70]. An increase in government
initiatives for development of hydrogen fuel cell
infrastructure is observed (e.g., Hydrogen Europe and
H2KOREA [71]). Eminent recognition of fuel cell and
hydrogen technologies in European energy policy (Clean
Energy package 2016) is another positive parameter of
hydrogen sector expansion [72].

Type of Solution
Fuel cells (hydrogen)

Value Proposition
Hydrogen fuel cells are electrochemical power
generators that combine hydrogen and oxygen to
produce electricity, with water and heat as
by-products//Integration into local grids and hybrid heat
systems provides means for increased energy
efficiency//Energy storage with hydrogen fuel cells can
lead to substantial cost reduction through peak
shaving//Fuel cells do not need to be periodically
recharged like batteries, but instead continue to produce
electricity as long as a fuel source is provided//Clean,
scalable, operate near-silently, and present improved
efficiency, especially in combined heat and power (CHP)
systems//Sustainable hydrogen can be utilized as a power
fuel in heavy duty transport vehicles (HDV) and also to
stabilize the grid, serving as storage for Power to Fuel
concept.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

631

Table A3. E-mobility integration into smart grid and city planning (Obj.3–ETT#3).
Category
V2G and EV
Charging
Infrastructure

Current and Future Market Needs
•As the adoption of EVs increases, decreasing prices of
EVs and new models with bigger batteries are
accelerating the market growth, making V2G an attractive
flexibility solution for the power system, accelerating the
convergence of mobility and energy [73]. As a result,
demand for charging infrastructure is rising,
transforming the EV charging industry drastically [74];
•Demand for V2G and smart charging is increasing
rapidly as countries move towards an electric transport
sector [73]. V2G and smart charging can spawn
widespread benefits for the grid while also for the city,
with an expected positive impact on energy saving,
environmental preservation, traffic management, and
urban planning of public spaces;
•Location constraints for the installation of EV charging
systems generate a need for highly customizable and
integrated solutions;
•Solar energy is quickly becoming the cheapest source of
electricity. In many countries solar is the lowest cost
power option today—both in residential and commercial
applications, but also increasingly in the utility-scale field
[75]. In PV markets where increased self-consumption is
the goal, charging EVs using solar energy is yet another
way to help achieve energy independence [76];
•Distribution System Operators cannot manage
congestion and ensure grid reliability. Leveling
advancement of the energy grid with new assets (e.g.,
e-buses) can help;

Type of Solution

Brief Description and Value Proposition

EV charging from PV
systems

Smart solar charging of EVs. RES generation//EV charging
with regard to every own user profile, type of customer
application, specific market, and pilot area//Carbon
footprint reduction//Provides intelligent techniques for
prosumers with EVs to optimize self-consumption, energy
usage and cost//Improved flexibility and controllability of
EVs and fleets//Rich user interface//Provides added value
services for electric grid, e.g., grid pressure reduction.

V2G

System connected bidirectionally with the power grid in
which plug-in EVs provide demand response services by
either returning electricity to the grid or by controlling
their charging rate. Charging of EVs utilizing RES while
providing also services to the grid from the vehicle
batteries//Provides flexibility at national level by facilitating
balancing in the wholesale market, and also at district level
by reducing the costs associated with reinforcing local
electricity grids and control or adjust charging in order to
decrease simultaneously and lower peaks in demand//Cost
reduction//Management as stand-alone unit or in local
clusters//Allows public transport operators to access the
energy markets for trading options.

Smart Lamp posts with
EV charging and 5G
functionalities

Smart Lampposts for efficient LED lighting, 4G/5G
Wi-Fi, and EV charging. Integration of wireless
monitoring, computational, networking, storage, and EV
charging capabilities in one infrastructure//Future-proof
solution with bleeding edge technology flexible and
cost-effective, tackling current e-mobility, connectivity, and
communication needs//Avoids the installation of multiple
infrastructures in the city, saving visual pollution//Allows
the renting of the different service providers with reduced
costs//Allows the integration of V2G.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

632

Table A3. Cont.
Category

Smart EV
Charging

Current and Future Market Needs

Type of Solution

Brief Description and Value Proposition

•The availability of EV charging stations needs to be
increased rapidly to support e-mobility. Smart lighting can
facilitate this transition, providing also good light quality,
large area coverage, and 5G connectivity. The mobile
operators are searching for opportunities to rapidly
implement the 5G networks, with low installation costs and
avoiding populating the city landscape with more and
more antennas.
•EV charging industry offers new services and capabilities
for interconnection with other intelligent systems.

DC lighting with EV
charging

Direct Current (DC) infrastructure network allowing
connection with smart lampposts having EV charging
points, 5G, monitoring sensors, and e-storage. Promotes
adoption of EVs//Promotes increase of large-scale local
e-storage capacity//Promotes more environmentally
friendly, emission-free, and energy saving mobility and
public lighting solutions//Successful introduction of
demand-supply energy management at district-level//Data
gathering for energy positive and smart
neighborhoods//Better alternative from antennas, which
create a disturbing view//No need of extra space for
charging poles for EVs.

•Decentralized energy generation with increased RES
penetration and liberalized energy markets render the
integration of e-mobility management systems of great
relevance.
•Key enabling technologies linked to the use of an ICT
platform with a wider energy management system offer
new services for smart cities, as they are cloud-based and
easily integrated with other smart energy and mobility
systems or software.
•Grid flexibility services is a topic that is expected to
become increasingly more relevant as RES penetration
tends to increase in the upcoming years, therefore
additional fluctuation on energy generation is set to occur.
• Smart EV charging solutions can satisfy the needs for
transparency, data, and information about the locations and
tariffs of charging points. The adoption of such controlling
solutions may lead to broadness of the available offers to
EV users increasing competition in the market and
therefore potentially lowering the charging costs, assisting
also in widening the existing EV charging network
available to EV users, fostering the transition to e-mobility.

EV charging management
platform

EV Charging Management Platform that ensures optimal
energy performance of EV chargers//Multi-level planning
that offers operational efficiency and the highest
performance of EV charging infrastructure//Optimization of
energy management//Data management and information
for aggregators, grid operators, municipality, and
citizens//Providing grid flexibility or ancillary services to
transmission system operators//Allows to shift or curtail
energy consumption at EV chargers (on demand side),
avoiding peak (high cost) periods//Customizable and
adaptable to the requirements of each district or area.

Intelligent and optimal
control algorithms

Monitoring and Controlling Software for EV Chargers.
Monitoring and control of EV chargers for public transport
in real-time operation to prevent grid connection overruns
and optimize utility of chargers//Lowering contracted
power agreements with grid operators//Lower upfront
investments in grid connection and number of chargers
(CAPEX)//Providing insights, data, and information related
to operational issues and needs//Ability to adjust to energy
peak demand//Flexible and better usage of the available
chargers//Reducing energy costs even further.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

633

Table A3. Cont.
Category
E-mobility
Schemes

Current and Future Market Needs
•As shared mobility grows in popularity, electrification
in the shared use market will help cities to meet their
climate goals, and reduce GHG emissions. Car sharing
and carpooling are changing the habits of consumers.
The focus is more on car use; car ownership may be less
important.
•Special attention is given to (electric) car/bike sharing
in new urban planning strategies. EV sharing will help
the quality of the historic city centers to be better
reflected.

Type of Solution
EV Sharing

Brief Description and Value Proposition
Shared Mobility Service of EVs in cities//Traffic
reduction//Cost reduction//Energy savings//Improves Air
Quality//Alleviating upfront costs//Creates lower-density
neighborhoods by decreasing the amount of parking spaces
needed//Bringing people into familiarization with
EVs//Offers additional benefits and deals for consumers
(i.e., experiences and photos exchange, navigation systems).

Smart Cities 2020, 3

634

Table A4. Citizen-driven innovation in co-creating smart city solutions (Obj.4–ETT#4).
Category

Current and Future Market Needs

Changing
Energy
Behavior
(through
Digital Tools)

•Citizen-centric solutions are adopted more easily by
means of citizens taking personal and collective
responsibility for how they ‘use’ their city, changing their
mindset, behaviors, and actions;
•Need for multi directional information flows (i.e.,
city-to-citizen, citizen-to-city) and using co-creation
methods to regenerate the cities bottom up;
•Citizen participation and adoption of solutions is
enhanced by the use of technologies and digitization;
•Understand the motivations and motives of citizens
leads to a more effective participation policy;
•Bring a more competitive and fun character to the use of
novel technologies, educate, engage, and reward toward
changing energy behavior;
•Travel-based mobile apps are the seventh
most-downloaded app category;
•Growth of tourist flows in heritage places raises a huge
need for intelligent management of these flows.
•Mobile apps capable of collecting information from
region/city/building and suggesting good practices to
optimize the tourist experience in heritage places—a
mandatory request of most heritage
municipalities/managers;
•Enable wide citizen/tourist participation, awareness, and
adoption rates, as well a faster and easier interaction
between consumers and devices;
•EU and government regulations promote smart grid
solutions and exponentially increasing adoption of smart
meters are also expected to drive the demand for big data
analytics among utility vendors where mobile apps
measuring energy consumption are also part of the
solutions to be developed.

Type of Solution

Brief Description and Value Proposition

Gamification

A gamification platform for changing the behavior of
citizens and end-users. Increases citizen engagement (through
gamification) in energy related technologies and
services//Interconnects users with mobile apps and with smart
metering and automation solutions.

Tourist apps

Tourist mobile apps for managing crowd flows in heritage
areas. Increase quality of life for tourists but also citizens
through reducing waiting times and intelligent management of
crowd flows//Easy to use app in order to potentiate tourists’
adhesion.

Cultural experiences
marketplace

Mobile apps promoting touristic cultural experiences
facilitating dissemination and publicity of energy related
measures. Cultural experiences app marketplace for
promoting touristic experiences and cultural activities in
specific regions facilitating dissemination and publicity at a
national/international level of energy related apps.

Energy consumption
monitor, automation,
and control through
mobile apps

Mobile apps for energy consumption/generation
monitoring, automation, control, and analytics. Integrates
diverse information, from different systems (PV generation, EV
charges, energy consumption, energy price, etc.).

Smart Cities 2020, 3

635

Table A4. Cont.
Category

Current and Future Market Needs

City Services
Infrastructures
and Systems

•Cities go digital both for internal workflow processes
and for new ways to engage with citizens;
•Regional and local authorities need to make informed,
based on real time data decisions regarding the planning
and investments;
•Citizens are increasingly interested in being informed
about various issues—among others, traffic, air quality,
waste collection, energy, and environmental aspects;
•CIPs can be integrated with sensor networks and data
lakes designed with functionalities that allow for cross
functional operation, enabling an advanced information
and interaction framework that helps cities perform more
efficiently and engage citizens;
•Real-time information about different environmental
variables is necessary in order to, e.g., help city
decision-makers make well-supported decisions
regarding the planning of new infrastructures and traffic
control (where not only atmospheric but also noise
pollution is crucial);
•Systems responsible for data acquisition must not
increase burden over existing power distribution grids
and should be easy to install by local non-specialized
workers. Wireless networks could cover all data
acquisition points with much lower cost and less effort for
installation and maintenance than wired networks.

Type of Solution

Brief Description and Value Proposition

City Information
Platform

A city information platform integrating data offering
standards-based management making smart cities
interoperable. Facilitates quick analysis and decision
support//Serves as a data acquisition hub//Policy making
tool//Provide a variety of citizen related
information//Engagement through providing a feeling of
co-ownership.

Wi-fi data acquisition
systems

Autonomous Wi-Fi Data Acquisition Systems for real-time
measurement of multiple environmental variables.
Real-time information on temperature, humidity, atmospheric
pressure, UV radiation, harmful gases, luminosity, and
noise//Correlates historical data in order to establish a map of
the organic behavior of a specific area//Independent from local
power distribution grids, power supply is guaranteed by the
integrated PV module and battery//Autonomous systems
following a modular approach and can be installed by
non-specialized workers according to data measurement needs.

Data lake intelligence
for positive
communities

Data lake intelligence with advanced cognitive and
semantic analysis for positive communities, providing open
data and information to better manage energy blocks and
players. Produce contextualized and focused
knowledge//Automatic collection of unstructured, external
(online) content from several sources (media, social networks).

Smart Cities 2020, 3

636

Table A4. Cont.
Category

Current and Future Market Needs

Fostering
Energy related
Innovations

•Increasing needs for cloud services that enable and
facilitate the experimentation, design, and
implementation of new products;
•Co-creation: Innovative solutions requirements and
specification should be co-developed together between
city partners and involved Startups;
•Experimental solutions deployed in integrated living
labs can be scaled-up to other cities;
•(Re-)design based on circular products and services is
growing fast, keeping energy and product fluxes as local
as possible;
•Lack of pro-active and leading contribution of
employees from local governments;
•Hiring of external consultants can deliver the necessary
temporary manpower and expertise but has the
disadvantage of the local loss of expertise once the project
is over and the consultants gone.

Decision
Support Tools

•Increase Citizen adoption, citizen participation, and
co-creation practices;
•Speed up the metabolism of city governments and
governance structures, giving agencies the ability to
watch events as they unfold, understand how demand
patterns are changing, and respond with faster and often
lower-cost solutions;
•More innovative solutions to be generated collectively
and adopted towards more energy consumption cautious
behaviors;
•Transition to a circular economy—reduce the negative
impacts of the linear economy.

Type of Solution

Brief Description and Value Proposition

Smart cloud for
innovative startups

Mobilize the local Startup Ecosystem, providing it with big
data analytics and agile coding frameworks. Develop and
test smart city solutions in a real-world context (living lab).

Acceleration Programs
(i.e., Pocifest)

Festivals/Events for accelerating the innovation process. The
innovation eco-system accelerating startups and new ventures
capitalizing on pilot demonstrations momentum

Governance innovation
and co-creation.(i.e.,
TIPPING approach)

A method for Governance innovation and co-development.
Increases the opportunities for own, local innovations and new
business development//Promotes the involvement of start-ups
from local applied science institutes//Promotes the stimulation
of out-of-the-box solutions generated by the design and art
sector//Promotes co-development of city projects with citizens
and crowd-funding//Build own expertise and manpower within
local governments, co-creating energy transition supportive
projects, in cooperation with local stakeholders all over the
quadruple helix//Own, local, and long-term expertise building.

Planning Urban
Transformation (i.e.,
Eco-Acupuncture)

A decision-making supportive tool. Analyzes new locally
specific starting points for urban transformation//Helps
visualize future possibilities and designs a series of
interventions towards a resilient urban environment//Mobilizes
academic researchers, students, representatives of local
government, business, and the wider community.

Design-based Value
Mapping for
Communities

A Design thinking method supporting decision-making and
co-creation. Creates opportunities for new energy and circular
product/services//Co-creates with all involved stakeholders a
network of lead users//Lead-users help to strengthen the initial
acceptance and support for the smart city projects, accelerating
them, but also increasing the adoption rates in the follow-up
phases of roll out.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

637

Smart Cities 2020, 3 FOR PEER REVIEW

34

Appendix B
Appendix B

Figure A1. Example of how the most frequent attributes were derived for solutions in ETT#1.
Figure A1. Example of how the most frequent attributes were derived for solutions in ETT#1.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

638

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.

7.
8.

9.
10.

11.

12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

17.
18.
19.

20.

21.

Schipper, R.P.J.R.; Silvius, A.J.G. Characteristics of Smart Sustainable City Development: Implications for
Project Management. Smart Cities 2018, 1, 75–97. [CrossRef]
Lampropoulos, I.; Alskaif, T.; Schram, W.; Bontekoe, E.; Coccato, S.; van Sark, W. Review of Energy in the
Built Environment. Smart Cities 2020, 3, 248–288. [CrossRef]
Ala-Juusela, M.; Crosbie, T.; Hukkalainen, M. Defining and operationalising the concept of an energy positive
neighbourhood. Energy Convers. Manag. 2016, 125, 133–140. [CrossRef]
Allam, Z.; Newman, P. Economically Incentivising Smart Urban Regeneration. Case Study of Port Louis,
Mauritius. Smart Cities 2018, 1, 53–74. [CrossRef]
Koutra, S.; Becue, V.; Gallas, M.-A.; Ioakimidis, C.S. Towards the development of a net-zero energy district
evaluation approach: A review of sustainable approaches and assessment tools. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2018, 39,
784–800. [CrossRef]
Sougkakis, V.; Lymperopoulos, K.; Nikolopoulos, N.; Margaritis, N.; Giourka, P.; Angelakoglou, K. An
Investigation on the Feasibility of Near-Zero and Positive Energy Communities in the Greek Context. Smart
Cities 2020, 3, 362–384. [CrossRef]
Moroke, T.; Schoeman, C.; Schoeman, I. Developing a neighbourhood sustainability assessment model: An
approach to sustainable urban development. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2019, 48, 101433. [CrossRef]
Becchio, C.; Bottero, M.C.; Corgnati, S.P.; Dell’Anna, F. Decision making for sustainable urban energy
planning: An integrated evaluation framework of alternative solutions for a NZED (Net Zero-Energy District)
in Turin. Land Use Policy 2018, 78, 803–817. [CrossRef]
JPI Urban Europe—The Knowledge Hub for Urban Transitions. Positive Energy Districts. Available online:
https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/ped/ (accessed on 7 March 2020).
JPI Urban Europe. Europe Towards Positive Energy Districts. A Compilation of Projects towards Sustainable
Urbanization and the Energy Transition. February 2020. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/app/u
ploads/2020/02/PED-Booklet-Update-Feb2020.pdf (accessed on 24 March 2020).
Agbali, M.; Trillo, C.; Ibrahim, I.A.; Arayici, Y.; Fernando, T. Are Smart Innovation Ecosystems Really Seeking
to Meet Citizens’ Needs? Insights from the Stakeholders’ Vision on Smart City Strategy Implementation.
Smart Cities 2019, 2, 307–327. [CrossRef]
Rat, E. Conclusions of the Council and of the Representatives of the Governments of the Member States,
meeting within the Council, on a Work Plan for Culture. Off. J. Eur. Union 2014, C 463, 4–14.
Tuiskula, H.; Puranik, S.; Ilieva, I.; Kunze, C. Identification and validation of new business models for DSO
business environment using business model canvas and stakeholder groups. In Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference on Electricity Distribution, Madrid, Spain, 3–6 June 2019.
European Commission. A Positive Energy CITY Transformation Framework |POCITYF Project|H2020|
CORDIS|. Available online: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/864400 (accessed on 28 April 2020).
European Commission. The European Green Deal; European Commission: Brussels, Belgium, 11 December
2019.
European Commission. SET-Plan Action 3.2, Implementation Plan, Europe to Become a Global Role Model in
Integrated, Innovative Solutions for the Planning, Deployment, and Replication of Positive Energy Districts; European
Commission: Brussels, Belgium, June 2018.
European Commission. Commission proposal for a Regulation: European Climate Law. Available online:
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/eu-climate-action/law_en (accessed on 28 April 2020).
European Commission. Horizon 2020, What Is Horizon 2020. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/progr
ammes/horizon2020/what-horizon-2020 (accessed on 28 April 2020).
EC (European Community). Directive (EU) 2018/844 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30
May 2018 amending Directive 2010/31/EU on the energy performance of buildings and Directive 2012/27/EU
on energy efficiency. Off. J. Eur. Union 2018, 156, 75–91.
European Union. Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on
energy efficiency, amending Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and
2006/32/EC. Off. J. Eur. Union 2012, 315, 1–56.
European Union. Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December
2018 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources. Off. J. Eur. Union 2018, 5, 82–209.

Smart Cities 2020, 3

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

35.
36.

37.
38.

39.

40.
41.
42.
43.
44.

639

European Commission. National Energy and Climate Plans (NECPs). Available online: https://ec.europa.
eu/info/energy-climate-change-environment/overall-targets/national-energy-andclimate-plans-necps_en
(accessed on 28 April 2020).
Covenant of Mayors-Home. Available online: https://www.covenantofmayors.eu/en/ (accessed on 28 April
2020).
Directive E, C. Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on
waste and repealing certain Directives. Off. J. Eur. Union 2008, 312, 3–30.
European Commission. New Circular Economy Strategy-Environment. Available online: https://ec.europa.
eu/environment/circular-economy/ (accessed on 28 April 2020).
SETIS Magazine: Digitalisation of the Energy Sector. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publicatio
n/newsletters/setis-magazine-digitalisation-energy-sector (accessed on 28 April 2020).
Serrano, W. Digital Systems in Smart City and Infrastructure: Digital as a Service. Smart Cities 2018, 1,
134–154. [CrossRef]
Anthopoulos, L.G. Understanding Smart Cities: A Tool for Smart Government or an Industrial Trick? In
Public Administration and Information Technology; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Swizerland, 2017;
ISBN 978-3-319-57014-3.
Lim, Y.; Edelenbos, J.; Gianoli, A. Identifying the results of smart city development: Findings from systematic
literature review. Cities 2019, 95, 102397. [CrossRef]
European Commision. Good Practice in Energy Efficiency. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/pu
blications/good-practice-energy-efficiency_en (accessed on 28 April 2020).
European Commission. White Paper 2011—Mobility and Transport. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/t
ransport/themes/strategies/2011_white_paper_en (accessed on 28 April 2020).
European Roadmap Electrification of Road Transport. Available online: https://egvi.eu/wp-content/uploads
/2018/01/ertrac_electrificationroadmap2017.pdf (accessed on 28 April 2020).
European Commision. Implementation of the Strategic Action Plan on Batteries: Building a Strategic Battery Value
Chain in Europe; European Commision: Brussels, Belgium, 2019.
Directive (EU) 2019/944 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 June 2019 on common rules for
the internal market for electricity and amending Directive 2012/27/EU (Text with EEA relevance). Off. J. Eur.
Union 2019, 158, 125–199.
PricewaterhouseCoopers. Creating the Smart Cities of the Future. Available online: https://www.pwc.com/
us/en/industries/capital-projects-infrastructure/library/future-smart-cities.html (accessed on 28 April 2020).
Four Ways for Smart Cities to Get Innovation (‘co-creation’) on the Cheap. Available online: https:
//enterpriseiotinsights.com/20181030/channels/fundamentals/four-ways-to-co-creation (accessed on 28 April
2020).
Nesti, G. Co-production for innovation: The urban living lab experience. Policy Soc. 2018, 37, 310–325.
[CrossRef]
McKinsey.
Smart City Technology for a More Liveable Future.
Available online: https:
//www.mckinsey.com/industries/capital-projects-and-infrastructure/our-insights/smart-cities-digita
l-solutions-for-a-more-livable-future (accessed on 28 April 2020).
Inclusive Smart Cities: A European Manifesto on Citizen Engagement.
2017.
Available
online: https://eu-smartcities.eu/sites/default/files/2017-09/EIP-SCC%20Manifesto%20on%20Citizen%20
Engagement%20%26%20Inclusive%20Smart%20Cities_0.pdf. (accessed on 28 April 2020).
Smart Cities and Community Lighthouse projects. Smartcities Information System. Available online:
https://smartcities-infosystem.eu/scc-lighthouse-projects (accessed on 28 April 2020).
Allam, Z.; Newman, P. Redefining the Smart City: Culture, Metabolism and Governance. Smart Cities 2018,
1, 4–25. [CrossRef]
Richter, C.; Kraus, S.; SyrjÃ¤, P. The Smart City as an opportunity for entrepreneurship. Int. J. Entrep. Ventur.
2015, 7, 211–226. [CrossRef]
Organ, S.; Proverbs, D.; Squires, G. Motivations for energy efficiency refurbishment in owner-occupied
housing. Struct. Surv. 2013, 31, 101–120. [CrossRef]
Angelakoglou, K.; Nikolopoulos, N.; Giourka, P.; Svensson, I.-L.; Tsarchopoulos, P.; Tryferidis, A.; Tzovaras, D.
A Methodological Framework for the Selection of Key Performance Indicators to Assess Smart City Solutions.
Smart Cities 2019, 2, 269–306. [CrossRef]

Smart Cities 2020, 3

45.
46.

47.
48.
49.
50.

51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

56.
57.

58.

59.
60.
61.

62.

63.

64.
65.

66.

640

Almquist, E.; Senior, J.; Bloch, N. The Elements of Value. Available online: https://hbr.org/2016/09/the-elem
ents-of-value (accessed on 29 April 2020).
Dameri, R.P.; Rosenthal-Sabroux, C. Smart City and Value Creation. In Smart City: How to Create Public and
Economic Value with High Technology in Urban Space; Progress in IS; Dameri, R.P., Rosenthal-Sabroux, C., Eds.;
Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2014; pp. 1–12. ISBN 978-3-319-06160-3.
Bocken, N.M.P.; Short, S.W.; Rana, P.; Evans, S. A literature and practice review to develop sustainable
business model archetypes. J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 65, 42–56. [CrossRef]
Afzal, H.; Khan, M.A.; ur Rehman, K.; Ali, I.; Wajahat, S. Consumer’s trust in the brand: Can it be built
through brand reputation, brand competence and brand predictability. Int. Bus. Res. 2010, 3, 43. [CrossRef]
Yoshino, N.; Hendriyetty, N.S.; Lakhia, S. Quality Infrastructure Investment: Ways to Increase the Rate of Return
for Infrastructure Investments; Social Science Research Network: Rochester, NY, USA, 2019.
Yigitcanlar, T.; Han, H.; Kamruzzaman, M.; Ioppolo, G.; Sabatini-Marques, J. The making of smart cities: Are
Songdo, Masdar, Amsterdam, San Francisco and Brisbane the best we could build? Land Use Policy 2019, 88,
104187. [CrossRef]
Shen, J.; Saijo, T. Does an energy efficiency label alter consumers’ purchasing decisions? A latent class
approach based on a stated choice experiment in Shanghai. J. Environ. Manag. 2009, 90, 3561–3573. [CrossRef]
Lytras, M.D.; Visvizi, A. Who uses smart city services and what to make of it: Toward interdisciplinary smart
cities research. Sustainability 2018, 10, 1998. [CrossRef]
Steg, L.; Perlaviciute, G.; van der Werff, E. Understanding the human dimensions of a sustainable energy
transition. Front. Psychol. 2015, 6, 805. [CrossRef]
Steg, L.; Shwom, R.; Dietz, T. What drives energy consumers?: Engaging people in a sustainable energy
transition. IEEE Power Energy Mag. 2018, 16, 20–28. [CrossRef]
O’Malley, M.; Kroposki, B.; Hannegan, B.; Madsen, H.; Andersson, M.; D’haeseleer, W.; McGranaghan, M.F.;
Dent, C.; Strbac, G.; Baskaran, S. Energy Systems Integration. Defining and Describing the Value Proposition;
National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL): Golden, CO, USA, 2016.
Finka, M.; Jaššo, M.; Husár, M. The Role of Public Sector in Local Economic and Territorial Development: Innovation
in Central, Eastern and South Eastern Europe; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2018.
Corgnati, S.P.; Cotana, F.; D’Oca, S.; Pisello, A.L.; Rosso, F. A cost-effective human-based energy-retrofitting
approach. In Cost-effective Energy Efficient Building Retrofitting; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2017;
pp. 219–255.
Bullier, A.; Milin, C. Alternative financing schemes for energy efficiency in buildings. ECEEE Summer Study
Rethink Renew Restart. 2013, pp. 795–805. Available online: https://www.buildup.eu/en/practices/publications
/alternative-financing-schemes-energy-efficiency-buildings (accessed on 29 April 2020).
Francisco, A.; Taylor, J.E. Understanding citizen perspectives on open urban energy data through the
development and testing of a community energy feedback system. Appl. Energy 2019, 256, 113804. [CrossRef]
Worley, H.; Pasquier, S.B.; Canpolat, E. Energy Subsidy Reform Assessment Framework: Designing Communication
Campaigns for Energy Subsidy Reform; World Bank: Washington, DC, USA, 2018.
Hoppe, T.; Coenen, F. Exploring interventions and tools used by REScoops to lower householders’ energy
consumption and stimulate investment in RES projects. In Proceedings of the Annual Work Conference,
Antwerp, Belgium, 24–25 November 2016; p. 27.
Giourka, P.; Sanders, M.W.J.L.; Angelakoglou, K.; Pramangioulis, D.; Nikolopoulos, N.; Rakopoulos, D.;
Tryferidis, A.; Tzovaras, D. The Smart City Business Model Canvas—A Smart City Business Modeling
Framework and Practical Tool. Energies 2019, 12, 4798. [CrossRef]
Virtual Power Plant (VPP) Market Size, Share|Industry Growth and Forecast, 2023. Available online:
https://www.psmarketresearch.com/market-analysis/virtual-power-plant-market (accessed on 28 April
2020).
IRENA Innovation Landscape for a Renewable-Powered Future. Available online: https://www.irena.org/pu
blications/2019/Feb/Innovation-landscape-for-a-renewable-powered-future (accessed on 28 April 2020).
IEA Cities Lead the Way on Clean and Decentralized Energy Solutions—News. Available online: https:
//www.iea.org/news/cities-lead-the-way-on-clean-and-decentralized-energy-solutions (accessed on 28 April
2020).
BCG The Future of Battery Production for Electric Vehicles. Available online: https://www.bcg.com/publicat
ions/2018/future-battery-production-electric-vehicles.aspx (accessed on 28 April 2020).

Smart Cities 2020, 3

67.

68.

69.
70.
71.
72.

73.
74.
75.
76.

641

Godschalk, M.S.; Bakema, G. 20,000 ATES systems in the Netherlands in 2020-Major step towards a sustainable
energy supply. Available online: https://www.iftechnology.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Godschalk-M.
S.-Bakema-G.-2009-20000-ATES-systems-in-2020.pdf (accessed on 29 April 2020).
Lund, H.; Østergaard, P.A.; Chang, M.; Werner, S.; Svendsen, S.; Sorknæs, P.; Thorsen, J.E.; Hvelplund, F.;
Mortensen, B.O.G.; Mathiesen, B.V.; et al. The status of 4th generation district heating: Research and results.
Energy 2018, 164, 147–159. [CrossRef]
Mohajerani, A.; Bakaric, J.; Jeffrey-Bailey, T. The urban heat island effect, its causes, and mitigation, with
reference to the thermal properties of asphalt concrete. J. Environ. Manag. 2017, 197, 522–538. [CrossRef]
AMR Hydrogen Fuel Cell Vehicle Market Statistics, Trends|Forecast 2026. Available online: https://www.alli
edmarketresearch.com/hydrogen-fuel-cell-vehicle-market (accessed on 28 April 2020).
Hydrogen Europe signs MoU with H2KOREA|Hydrogen. Available online: https://hydrogeneurope.eu/ne
ws/hydrogen-europe-signs-mou-h2korea (accessed on 28 April 2020).
FCH JU Book—Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Technology: Europe’s Journey to a Greener World|www.fch.europa
.eu|. Available online: https://www.fch.europa.eu/publications/fch-ju-book-fuel-cell-and-hydrogen-technolo
gy-europes-journey-greener-world (accessed on 28 April 2020).
IRENA Innovation Outlook: Smart Charging for Electric Vehicles. Available online: https://www.irena.org/
publications/2019/May/Innovation-Outlook-Smart-Charging (accessed on 28 April 2020).
Global EV Outlook 2019: Scaling-up the Transition to Electric Mobility |en|OECD|OCDE. Available online:
https://www.oecd.org/fr/publications/global-ev-outlook-2019-35fb60bd-en.htm (accessed on 28 April 2020).
European Commission PV Status Report 2019. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/publication/eurscientific-and-technical-research-reports/pv-status-report-2019 (accessed on 28 April 2020).
IRENA Future of Solar Photovoltaic. Available online: https://www.irena.org/publications/2019/Nov/Future
-of-Solar-Photovoltaic (accessed on 28 April 2020).
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

