energies
Article

The Sense and Non-Sense of PEDs—Feeding Back Practical
Experiences of Positive Energy District Demonstrators into the
European PED Framework Definition Development Process
Han Vandevyvere 1,2, * , Dirk Ahlers 1
1

2

*

Citation: Vandevyvere, H.; Ahlers,
D.; Wyckmans, A. The Sense and
Non-Sense of PEDs—Feeding Back
Practical Experiences of Positive
Energy District Demonstrators into
the European PED Framework
Definition Development Process.
Energies 2022, 15, 4491. https://
doi.org/10.3390/en15124491
Academic Editors: Ala Hasan and
Hassam Ur Rehman
Received: 18 April 2022
Accepted: 31 May 2022
Published: 20 June 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

and Annemie Wyckmans 1

Department of Architecture and Planning, NTNU—Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
7491 Trondheim, Norway; dirk.ahlers@ntnu.no (D.A.); annemie.wyckmans@ntnu.no (A.W.)
VITO/EnergyVille, 3600 Genk, Belgium; han.vandevyvere@vito.be
Correspondence: han.h.b.vandevyvere@ntnu.no

Abstract: This article discusses early developments of the Positive Energy District (PED) concept,
both in terms of its definition and of its implementation in real world demonstrators. Based on the
specific challenges for creating an operational definition for the European +CityxChange project,
the feasibility of creating a PED was practically explored by identifying 4 possible subtypes that
respond to varying constraints regarding the energy balance of the PED. This article provides the
context and describes these 4 ambitions levels: PEDautonomous , PEDdynamic , PEDvirtual , and Pre PED;
and the 3 boundary modes: geographical, functional, and virtual. The work thus expands on the first
general PED definitions as they were put forward in the SET-plan and by the European Commission,
while allowing a better response to the specific boundary conditions of PEDs’ physical context. As
such, it provides an operational, city-focused, bottom-up PED definition. The present study analyses
how these efforts connect to current work being performed on the development of a European PED
Framework Definition. In the latter, new elements such as context factors are introduced in order to
account for the varying boundary conditions that PEDs must address, and in particular the difficulties
of realising PEDs in existing and densely built-up urban areas. Hereby it can be argued that the
approach with 4 subtypes is a bottom-up method of addressing the same challenges as a context factor
based approach operating in a top-down manner, this time starting from the regional or national
renewable energy potentials. Both approaches indeed strive towards an optimum setup of PEDs
both within their geographical boundaries and in their interactions with the surrounding energy
infrastructures and cities. These efforts are instrumental in helping to prevent that a PED is being
regarded as a goal in se, functionally disconnected from its surroundings. There are strong arguments
in favour of handling PEDs as building blocks for the broader realisation of carbon neutral cities and
regions, thus contributing to the systemic change that is needed to futureproof the built environment
as a whole. Without applying this integrating perspective, PEDs risk creating a sub-optimal lockin within their sites and thus remain one-off experiments, lacking connection to the wider urban
sustainability strategies that are needed to properly address today’s energy and climate emergencies.
This holds even more when considering the quality-related requirements that come with sustainable
urban design and governance. Therefore, this study further explores how PEDs can fully support
such a deep urban sustainability transition, and what could consequently be the next steps towards
successful and upscaled PED deployment.
Keywords: positive energy districts; positive energy blocks; PED concept; energy transition; climate
neutrality; smart sustainable cities; Smart Cities and Communities; European energy transition;
energy planning; urban planning; sustainable urban design, advanced energy systems

This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Problem Statement
In the context of achieving climate neutrality for cities, the concept of Positive Energy
Districts (PEDs) has recently gained widespread attention [1–4]. One contributing factor to

Energies 2022, 15, 4491. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15124491

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

2 of 16

this success certainly is the scale level at which a PED operates, transcending the individual
building level intervention and thus opening up more and better possibilities of both
advanced technical energy system integration and the upscaled contribution of many
societal actors to sustainable urban (re)development. At the same time, PEDs remain
an enterprise at a scale which is manageable in terms of straightforward planning and
execution. PEDs thus can help to divide the enormous challenge of making cities climateneutral into more practicable projects.
An important reason for targeting energy and climate strategies at the district level is
that such an approach can deliver benefits over a building-by-building approach, both in
terms of energy system design and integration and in terms of striving towards optimized
urban morphology. Specific opportunities emerge regarding technical and economical scale
advantages of setting up district energy systems compared to the mere juxtaposition of
individual building installations, facilitating local exchanges of energy between different
building programmes and mobility applications, and providing district scale energy storage
systems. Integrated sector coupling, involving exchanges between electrical and thermal
systems, completes the palette of such strategies. This shows that PEDs are not only
advanced energy systems from the technological point of view, but also from the integration
view and regarding innovative larger-scale urban deployments. At the same time, PEDs
are not an entirely new concept and have predecessors such as Net Zero Energy Districts
(NZEDs) [5], while district scale approaches for energy systems and the effects of urban
morphology and programming on energy use have since long been studied in the research
literature [5–11].
When the term ‘positive energy district’ was coined, there was an intention to use the
word ‘positive’ rather than the terms (net) ‘zero’ (energy or emission) or climate ‘neutral’,
thus leveraging on the positive connotation it entails. Whether such naming effectively
helped the uptake of the concept would however require a specific study.
The PED concept has now been taken up beyond the original scope of the European
Commission and is under study by organisations such as the European Energy Research
Alliance (EERA) [12], the Urban Europe Research Alliance (UERA), the Joint Programming
Initiative Urban Europe (JPI UE) [13], and the International Energy Agency (IEA) [14]
for further development and roll-out. Within this, specific actors have also proposed to
interpret the term ‘positive’ as a ‘positive impact on the wider energy systems’ of a city or a
region, rather than just an internal positive yearly energy balance [15].
The practical realisation of the concept, in the way it was initially conceived, does
however come with significant difficulties, as can be illustrated by experiences gained
in recent Horizon 2020 Smart Cities and Communities Lighthouse projects (including
+CityxChange). For example, it appears to be particularly challenging to realise a PED
in the context of an urban district renovation project when the building density in the
district is high or when many heritage buildings are present. In such a context, it becomes
difficult to generate sufficient renewable energy onsite while regulatory and organisational
constraints, both in the energy domain and beyond, tend to complicate matters even more.
These difficulties seem, at least, to jeopardise the possibilities of implementing a narrow
interpretation of the PED concept. At the same time, it can be questioned if such a narrow
approach is desirable at all. Indeed, PEDs do not constitute a goal of their own but must
rather be considered as building blocks of the climate neutral cities and regions of the future,
whether that is expressed in the technical terms of renewable energy system integration or
through the wider requirements of achieving integrated urban sustainability through high
quality district design and governance.
The main research questions addressed in this article are therefore: How to improve
the qualities of the PED concept and its applicability in practice? What recommendations
can be drawn from experiences with past and ongoing PED pilots, in particular regarding
the way these pilots translate general PED requirements into an operational working
definition? How can this feed back into the ongoing research for the formulation of an
EU-wide PED framework definition? These questions shall not only be addressed from a

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

3 of 16

technical viewpoint, but also from the broader perspective of realising integrated urban
sustainability, entailing both quantitative and qualitative considerations.
2. Materials and Methods
The research materials supporting the analysis and conclusions of the present article
stem from three main sources:
1.

2.

3.

the implementation of PED pilots in the Horizon 2020 SCC Lighthouse project +CityxChange [16,17]. These pilots are situated in Trondheim (NO) and Limerick (IE). In
Trondheim, three pilot areas distributed across the city test positive energy blocks
(PEBs, see further for the relation with PEDs) and local flexibility markets for exchanging and trading energy, both heat and electricity. In Limerick, one pilot area is situated
in the historical Georgian city centre while a turbine in the Shannon river completes
the pilot’s energy infrastructure. Realising PEBs and exchanging and trading energy
are also the main goals. In Limerick the pilot project includes the energy retrofit of
heritage buildings. Two challenges needed to be addressed: translating the general
PED definition of the H2020 call into an operational framework on the ground, and
subsequently realizing the operational requirements in practice. This included substantial challenges, especially with regard to effectively building the PED pilots under
the present regulatory, economic and societal circumstances. In addition, realising
PEDs in existing urban districts is considered more difficult than through newbuilt
areas, but the city and PED ambitions include the transformation of existing areas;
the editing of a PED ‘solution booklet’ [3] for the Smart Cities Information System (SCIS), now integrated in the Smart Cities Marketplace. The booklet was a
co-production between SCIS and four H2020 SCC Lighthouse projects focusing on
the realization of PED pilots: Atelier, SPARCS, MakingCity and +CityxChange. The
resulting guidance document is based on a systematic analysis of the barriers and
opportunities encountered in the different PED pilots;
participation in the Alignment Core Group for a PED definition and integrated approach (see Section 6), led by JPI Urban Europe. Participating organisations include
EERA JPSC PED modules, SET Plan Action 3.2 PED Programme/DUT PED pillar,
COST Action PED-EU-NET, IEA EBC Annex 83, UERA PED WG, PED-related H2020
SCC projects, H2020 SCC Task Group Replication, Scalable Cities (EU SCC Lighthouse Project group) and the Smart Cities Marketplace. The working group is thus
composed of members from academia, research & technology organisations (RTOs)
and the field of practice, and aims to formulate a PED framework definition that
can be used throughout the EU by combining a scientifically sound approach with
requirements of accessibility and ease of use by all concerned stakeholders. It operates
through regular working meetings of the core expert group while broader consultations of PED stakeholders (e.g., JPI Urban Europe member state representations)
provide for feedback from the field of practice.

In this way the research method for this article confronts applied case study analysis (points 1 and 2) with the ongoing transdisciplinary research for formulating a PED
framework definition (points 3 and 2). The main underlying methodological framework
for making analyses and recommendations in the present article is based on multimodal
system analysis, a knowledge theory originally formulated by the Dutch philosopher of law
Herman Dooyeweerd and subsequently elaborated in, among others, systems science and
urban planning theory [9,18–21]. This knowledge theory also structures the content of the
SCIS solution booklets. It has proven to be both methodologically robust and operationally
performant for dealing with complex, interdisciplinary research questions.
3. Background: The Emergence of PEB and PED Concepts from 2015 Onwards
The concept of a Positive Energy Block (PEB) can be understood in the context of
increasing European ambitions in the topics of energy in buildings [22] and the energy
transition [23]. It initially emerged out of a European project demonstrator, Hikari, a housing

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

4 of 16

complex at the Confluence district in Lyon (FR), as part of the EU FP7 EeB-generation
project Next-Buildings [24], completed in 2015 [25]. It was estimated that the demonstrator
displayed some performances and qualities that merited to be replicated. As Hikari had
been defined as an îlot à énergie positive (energy positive islet), it was chosen to adapt a
translation to English as ‘Positive Energy Block’. That idea was subsequently presented at
an EU conference in December 2015 for uptake by the EIP SCC Marketplace (European
Innovation Partnership on Smart Cities and Communities) in a new Action Cluster initiative
on PEBs [2,26].
Subsequently the concept was promoted through the EIP SCC Marketplace as a way
forward in scaling up zero or positive energy concepts from the building level to groups
of buildings and, eventually, districts. At this stage, the PEB concept requested “at least
three connected neighbouring buildings producing on a yearly basis more primary energy than what
they use.” [27] Initially, realising a functional mix (and thus also enabling useful energy
exchanges between different building programmes and buildings’ energy profiles) in a
PEB was judged to be paramount as well, but would not yet be included in the definition.
However, realising integrated sustainability would come back in later definitions. The
initiators of the concept were also sensitive to a positive connotation of the wording in the
definition, which is rather hard to find in terms such as ‘zero emissions’, ‘carbon neutral’ or
‘zero energy’ [28].
The 2018 Implementation Plan of SET-plan Action 3.2 [1] (Strategic Energy Technology
Plan), developed by JPI UE [13] (Joint Programming Initiative Urban Europe) in cooperation
with EERA JPSC [12] (Joint Programme on Smart Cities of the European Energy Research
Alliance), EU Member States and Associated Countries and other European initiatives, set
out the goal of realising 100 PEDs by 2025. In this instance, the requirement for a PED was
stated as:
“Positive Energy Districts (PED) are energy efficient districts that have net zero carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions and work towards an annual local surplus production of renewable energy (RES). Such districts help raise the quality of life in European cities, while
reaching the COP21 targets and making Europe a global role model. An open innovation
framework with cities, industry, investors, research institutes and citizens’ organisations
all working together will help develop PEDs and the necessary R&I Activities. The
approach integrates the technological, spatial, regulatory, financial, legal, environmental,
social and economic perspectives.” [29] (pp. 28–29).
Equally starting in 2018, the European Commission formally introduced PEB & PED
related requirements in the Horizon 2020 project calls on Smart Cities and Communities
Lighthouse projects (LC-SC3-SCC-1-2018 call) [30] (The PEB/PED requirement is included
in the calls as of 2018, [31,32]). The 2018-2020 H2020 Work Programme for these calls
defined a PEB/PED as an implementation goal for the innovation projects as follows:
“Positive Energy Blocks/Districts consist of several buildings (new, retro-fitted or a
combination of both) that actively manage their energy consumption and the energy
flow between them and the wider energy system. Positive Energy Blocks/Districts have
an annual positive energy balance. They make optimal use of elements such as advanced materials (e.g., bio-based materials), local RES, local storage, smart energy grids,
demand-response, cutting edge energy management (electricity, heating and cooling),
user interaction/involvement and ICT.
Positive Energy Blocks/Districts are designed to be an integral part of the district/city
energy system and have a positive impact on it (also from the circular economy point
of view). Their design is intrinsically scalable and they are well embedded in the spatial, economic, technical, environmental and social context of the project site.” [31],
(p. 117, [33]).
The calls featured for the first time, a requirement for PEBs/PEDs to fit into an overall
Bold City Vision of city-level climate neutrality strategies. This is a step change because
they do not just include more positive energy buildings, but highlight the opportunities of

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

5 of 16

using a complete urban block/district and its multi-faceted characteristics. They also had
an additional section on expected focus areas, which highlight further expectations and
clarify ambitions and motivations:
•
•

•

•
•

“Focus on mixed use urban districts and positively contribute to the overall city
goals;
Develop solutions that can be replicated/gradually scaled up to city level. The
technical, financial, social, and legal feasibility of the proposed solutions should be
demonstrated in the actual proposal.
Make local communities and local governments (particularly city planning departments) an active and integral part of the solution, increase their energy awareness
and ensure their sense of ownership of the smart solutions. This should ensure
sustainability of Positive Energy Blocks/Districts;
Promote decarbonisation, while improving air quality.
[. . . ]” [31]

JPI UE and EERA JPSC meanwhile set out to further develop a PED framework
definition that could be used EU-wide. JPI UE held a workshop, partially based on a
request for input by JPI UE for a collection of potential PED projects [34] (Positive Energy
Districts and Neighbourhoods Programme—Cities Workshop and Site Visit, 3–4 April
2019, Nordbahnhalle, Vienna [35]). The event was combined with, amongst others, a
+CityxChange Learning Workshop on 2 April 2019 addressing related challenges and
gathering project requirements and insights [36]. A joint outcome was an initial PED
definition [37] with the main characteristics as presented later in this article.
This led to the following formulation, consulted among national delegations in and
beyond the EU and published in a white paper in 2020:
“Positive Energy Districts are energy-efficient and energy-flexible urban areas or groups
of connected buildings which produce net zero greenhouse gas emissions and actively
manage an annual local or regional surplus production of renewable energy. They require
integration of different systems and infrastructures and interaction between buildings, the
users and the regional energy, mobility and ICT systems, while securing the energy supply
and a good life for all in line with social, economic and environmental sustainability.” [38]
This definition forms the basis for further analysis through the present article. Note
that the definition leaves space for ‘local or regional’ energy production, thus hinting
at solutions for the problem of realising self-sufficiency on the basis of on-site energy
production alone. Note also the inclusion of mobility, which can be interpreted as a PED
providing a share towards mobility energy use, and also optimises other mobility impacts.
Meanwhile, experiences from the field of practice such as the Horizon 2020 Smart Cities
and Communities Lighthouse Projects (H2020 SCC LH) and their practical implementations
were being made, testing and implementing the concept in practise. These experiences
show that major challenges occur in turning existing urban districts into PEDs on the
one hand from the technical and energy view and need for local generation, and on the
other hand from the needed long term strategies involving multiple actors in complex
stakeholder networks. One of the early outcomes was the SCIS PED solution booklet [3].
This solution booklet was co-created with participants from the H2020 SCC Lighthouse
Projects +CityxChange (including authors of the present article), MakingCity, SPARCS
and Atelier and thus directly translates the practical experience gained from PED pilots. It
included the insight that a PED is not a product, but rather a process.
Building further on these initiatives and experiences, the COST Action PED-EU-NET [4]
(European Cooperation in Science and Technology - Positive Energy Districts European
Network) and the Annex 83 on Positive Energy Districts by the International Energy Agency’s
Energy in Buildings and Communities Programme (IEA EBC Annex 83) [14] were created to
perform more in-depth collaborative research on the PED concept and its potentials, and to
publish their findings.

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

6 of 16

4. An Operational PED Definition with 4 Subtypes: Addressing the Practical
Implementation Challenges from a Bottom-Up Perspective
The SET implementation plan was publicly issued in 2018, and the EU H2020 work
programme in 2017 for the 2018 calls, with their initial definitions as described above in
Section 3. The same year, at the end of 2018, the first SCC projects granted from that call
started their PEB demonstrators.
4.1. Process
These projects had a strong need for a concrete and operational working definition
of PEBs that could be used in practice with cities and solution providers. An operational
definition was initiated from the +CityxChange project in cooperation with EERA JPSC.
The +CityxChange project [17] includes 32 partners among which 7 cities: 2 Lighthouse
cities with detailed plans and immediate deployment activities in the project, and 5 Fellow
Cities, which refine their plans within the project towards setting up PEBs. It was important
to build an operational PEB definition that included the contexts and requirements of the
different PEBs in all the cities, as a first requirement. It also became even clearer that an
inclusive definition was needed. City representatives pointed out that cities each follow
different development paths, which need to be possible to align with the definition. More
generally, it was considered very important to not be too restrictive, as not to reduce or
prevent any innovation potential towards PEBs and local development [36,39].
The process included a number of workshops such as an initial +CityxChange Learning
Workshop, 2 April 2019, Vienna [36]; the SET-plan PED definition and boundaries work
group meeting, 6 May 2019, Brussels (‘PED definition development v3’) [39]; and a PED
workshop at the 3rd International Conference on Smart and Sustainable Planning for Cities
and Regions SSPCR 2019, Bolzano, 11 December 2019 (‘PED definition development v4’).
At the Brussels meeting, some reflections on the Horizon Europe Mission Area on “ClimateNeutral and Smart Cities” were included in the programme, and as such cities obviously
can be considered as an upscaling from PEBs and PEDs towards PECs or PERs (Positive
Energy Cities or Regions, currently not established terms) as steps towards the EU goal of
Climate-Neutrality by 2050. Such strategic alignment and city-level scaling ambitions were
present early for example in +CityxChange [40] and definition work [41]. Results were
summarised in multiple project reports and presentations [36,39].
The workshops collaboratively developed insights in a wide range of technical and
governance challenges:
•

•

•

•

economic feasibility and cost efficiency: in particular, energetic retrofitting of existing
buildings remains costly with long payback periods—often going far beyond the
range of a 30 years investment horizon [42]. In the European context, most PEDs are
expected to be urban retrofit PEDs. Business models that turn the PED opportunities
into benefits are being developed, but many secondary benefits cannot be captured in
financials while being invaluable for cities;
optimum renewable and sustainable energy provision: in many cases, the amount of
renewable or sustainable energy needed for the district could possibly be produced
in a cheaper and more efficient way outside the district or the city, but such a setup
would at least partly go against the PED ambition. Nevertheless this can be balanced
against the reduced needs for grid upgrades or other ‘hidden’ costs;
the stated need of PEDs to flexibly interact with their hinterland in terms of exchanging
energy flows and helping to balance energy grids [38]: whereas the theoretical need for
this faculty is commonly recognized, its practical implementation through operational
schemes such as Energy Communities (in line with the recast EU directives in this
field) is yet at the experimentation phase—see also below;
the share of mobility energy to be provided by a PED: none of the current definitions
have managed to define a desired performance level. It can be argued that mobility
can only be partially included in PEDs as transport tends to act at a different scale.

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

7 of 16

•

•

•

Examples of emission accounting models for mobility can also be widely varying in
different regions;
regulatory barriers: beneficial local cost sharing models are not yet possible in the
electrical grid and markets. Examples include no opportunity for local exchange of
energy through the grid while extra wires would break the system, or feeding back
energy for prosumers not being viable under present regulations and technicalities,
or no feed-in tariff for surplus energy from prosumers being available, meaning they
could not receive any payment [43]. Currently the implementation of the Clean Energy
for All Europeans Package [44], including the facilitation of Energy Communities and
peer-to-peer trading, is not yet finished in several Member States (like Belgium [45] or
the Netherlands [46] to name just a few), thus prolonging the stated difficulties;
cultural factors such as landscape and heritage value: rarely the full technical potential
of onsite renewable energy generation can be realised. For example, neither shall all
building roofs and façades be clad with PV panels nor shall urban wind turbines be
installed wherever possible throughout the urban texture.
organisational and governance factors: PEDs are not a status, but a process. Taking this
further, PEDs are also not a single product. They are a multi-stakeholder undertaking,
addressing the full complexity of urban (re)development.

4.2. Supporting Evidence from Cases
The above stated technical and governance challenges can be illustrated by examples
from +CityxChange’s PED pilots in Limerick and Trondheim [17]. In Limerick, the PED pilot
is situated in the city’s central Georgian heritage district. It is characterised by mixed use
(residential and non-residential building programmes), varying urban densities in a typical
range of 20 to 50 dwellings per hectare, and a strong presence of heritage buildings [3,16].
The district is in need of urban renewal. Given the urban density and the heritage character,
the possibilities of both increasing energy efficiency by insulating building envelopes and
producing sufficient renewable energy on-site, mainly through PV, are limited. A choice
was therefore made to complement on-site renewable energy production with energy
supply from a water turbine to be placed in the Shannon river, about 1–2 km upstream from
the district. This implied that the turbine should be considered as a virtual asset of the PED
neighbourhood, as it is not situated within the strict geographical boundaries of the PED. A
number of challenges need to be addressed. First, it remains difficult to convince individual
building owners to step into the PED pilot and perform substantial investments on their
properties. This makes setting high retrofit standards for the housing stock more difficult.
Second, current regulations do not allow for implementing the flexibility and peer-to-peer
trading mechanisms needed for the operation of the PED, and special dispensation is hard
to achieve, even if the EU Clean Energy Package’s electricity directives have meanwhile
been (partially) transposed to Member State legislation. Third, and linked, permitting
procedures to allow for the placement of the turbine in the Shannon river are challenging,
not the least because this regulatory case is virtually unseen in Ireland. In this way the
Limerick pilot demonstrates all of the above-mentioned challenges. If all these challenges
receive a proper address and the PED can be realised, another challenge immediately comes
forward. While this first PED could profit from the opportunity of placing a turbine in the
Shannon river—first come, first serve—more areas of the city with PED ambitions would
meet increasing difficulties for realising their goals as the pool of virtual assets such as the
turbine will continue to decrease. This brings forward a question of fairness and balancing:
how much external energy may be reserved for a given district while not jeopardising the
possibilities of other districts to become PEDs as well. This situation is a major argument to
support the use of context factors and national or regional ‘energy envelopes’ with wider
integration and balancing potential as discussed further below.
In the Trondheim case, multiple PEDs were planned in the city. As part of the deployment, work is underway to connect these and allow interaction, exchange, and trading
of energy between PEDs [47]. In addition, local renewables may not be sufficient in all

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

8 of 16

cases. Integration of dedicated external renewable sources is being considered, in line with
the PEDvirtual concept. Challenges include as above the willingness to invest and finding
suitable risk/benefit sharing models. Financing of PEDs and of overall decarbonisation
efforts thus remain challenging, though PEDs can contribute with additional unlocked
business models.
4.3. Outcome: PED Definition, 3 System Boundary Modes, 4 Ambition Levels
The resulting operational PED definition includes a working definition, 4 ambition
levels, and 3 system boundaries [39]. The agreed working definition states:
“Positive Energy Districts (PED) are mixed-use energy-efficient districts that have net
zero carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and actively manage an annual local surplus production of renewable energy (RES). They require interaction and integration between
buildings, the users and the regional energy, mobility and ICT system, while ensuring social, economic and environmental sustainability for current and future generations.” [39]
For the question of system boundaries, a distinction was proposed (as early as 3 April
2019 [37]) [36] and consolidated [39] between 3 modes:
•

•

•

Geographical boundary: Spatial-physical limits of the PED in terms of delineated buildings,
sites and (energy) infrastructures—these may be contiguous or in a configuration of detached
patches;
Functional boundary: Limits of the PED in terms of energy grids, e.g., the electricity grid
behind a substation that can be considered as an independent functional entity serving the
PED; a district heating system that can be considered as a functional part of the PED even if
the former’s service area is substantially larger than the heating sector of the PED in question;
or a gas network in the same sense;
Virtual boundary: Limits of the PED in terms of contractual boundaries, e.g., including an
energy production infrastructure owned by the PED occupants but situated outside the normal
geographical PED boundaries (for example an offshore wind turbine owned through shares by
the PED occupant community).

Based on these boundary conditions, 4 possible types of PEDs were proposed according to the realisable ambition levels. (These were initially named as Diamond, Platinum,
Gold, and Silver, used in April 2019 mainly in internal documents [36], and quickly changed
from May 2019 onwards into the more descriptive terms.) The ambition levels are: Autonomous PED, Dynamic PED, Virtual PED and Pre-PED, having definitions as follows
[37,39,41]:
•

•

•

•

PEDautonomous : ‘plus-autarkic’, net positive yearly energy balance within the geographical boundaries of the PED and internal energy balance at any moment in time (no
imports from the hinterland) or even helping to balance the wider grid outside, not
expected as a common case (see Figure 1);
PEDdynamic : net positive yearly energy balance within the geographical boundaries of
the PED but dynamic exchanges with the hinterland to compensate for momentary
surpluses and shortages (see Figure 2);
PEDvirtual : net positive yearly energy balance within the virtual boundaries of the PED
but dynamic exchanges with the hinterland to compensate for momentary surpluses
and shortages (see Figure 3);
Pre PED: candidate PED, no net positive yearly energy balance within the geographical
boundaries of the PED but energy difference acquired on the market by importing
certified green energy (i.e., realizing a zero carbon district).

These levels were carefully chosen and developed to correspond to both a group of set
points of ambition and technical potential, and to form a clear pathway of development,
thus allowing for growing achievements towards high synergistical ambitions with clear
milestones:

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

9 of 16

A Pre PED does not yet achieve a positive annual energy balance by itself, but achieves
it through buying green energy through outside general markets, while developing the PED.
A PEDvirtual achieves a net positive annual energy balance within the virtual boundaries
of the PED, allowing for adaptation of local generation sites. This situation is found in
many on-the-ground cases. It reflects the challenges of direct local generation in urban
areas and on any type of buildings, and allows flexibility in planning boundaries and
implementation paths to include generation sites that are not building-integrated or outside
the core geographical boundary. A PEDdynamic has a net positive annual energy balance
within the geographical boundaries of the PED. It exchanges energy with the wider grid,
into which it is integrated. This is a type of PED that can be implemented in geographical/urban conditions that have better pre-conditions for local renewables. PEDdynamic and
PEDvirtual will be the most common types in regenerated European urban environments,
allowing the built environment to act as a kind of battery for the broader energy grid.
Finally, a PEDautonomous is autonomous from the grid on the demand side—it will have a
positive energy balance not on average, but at any point in time—possibly turning it into a
pure energy producer from the grid view—though usually not fully a virtual power plant.
Only few areas will be able to become PEDautonomous , however, in particular when other
co-benefits and potential negative externalities such as urban quality of life, spatial quality,
nature-based solutions are taken into account.

Autonomous PED

Solar

Virtual boundary
Geographical boundary
Local
Renewable
Generation

PED-level
renewables
Urban wind

Energy Efficiency

Export
Local biomass

Storage

exchange &
conversion

Storage

Energy
trading

Export

Geothermal

Figure 1. Autonomous PED, principle and system boundaries. Only exports to the surrounding
system. Including energy efficiency measures, renewables (solar, PV, wind, biomass, geothermal,
small hydropower), waste heat recovery, electric and thermal storage, integration of mobility energy
needs (and EVs as batteries), sector coupling between electric and thermal.

Dynamic PED

Solar

Virtual boundary
Geographical boundary
Local
Renewable
Generation

PED-level
renewables
Urban wind

Energy Efficiency

Exchange
Local biomass

Storage

exchange &
conversion

Storage

Energy
trading

Exchange

Geothermal

Figure 2. Dynamic PED, principle and system boundaries. Including energy efficiency measures,
renewables (solar, PV, wind, biomass, geothermal, small hydropower), waste heat recovery, electric
and thermal storage, integration of mobility energy needs (and EVs as batteries), sector coupling
between electric and thermal, and exchange with the surrounding systems.

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

10 of 16

Virtual PED

Solar

Virtual boundary
Geographical boundary

External
Renewable
Supply

Local
Renewable
Generation
Energy Efficiency

Exchange
Storage

exchange &
conversion

Biomass

Storage

Energy
trading

Exchange

Geothermal

Figure 3. Virtual PED, principle and system boundaries. Including virtual integration of external
renewables and exchange with the surrounding systems. Including energy efficiency measures,
renewables (solar, PV, wind, biomass, geothermal, small hydropower), waste heat recovery, electric
and thermal storage, integration of mobility energy needs (and EVs as batteries), sector coupling
between electric and thermal, and exchange with the surrounding systems.

In summary, identifying PEDs from such differentiated perspectives would allow
sufficient flexibility for adaptations to a range of different city conditions from existing
projects, while keeping a certain standardisation and commonality, all within the H2020
SCC programme, the SET Plan, and future refinements. It would for example allow PEDs
to import energy from outside the strict district boundaries, in situations where it is not
feasible to generate all needed renewable resources onsite. This setup also interprets and
translates the aspect of ‘local or regional’ energy production, as put forward in the JPI UE
framework definition, into precise operating conditions.
The differentiation into 4 subtypes was subsequently picked up in the PED definitions
of, for example, SCC Lighthouse Projects such as +CityxChange [17] (including the authors
of the present article) [16,39,48] or SPARCs [49] and other projects such as syn.ikia [50].
5. From Technical Solutions to Urban Transition Governance for Systemic Change:
Addressing the Contribution of PEDs towards Realising Climate Neutral Cities
and Regions
The four PED types identified in the previous section are intended to also be able to
tackle the second major implementation barrier for PEDs. This second barrier is strongly related to the challenge of overhauling the energy paradigm that underlies the current modus
operandi of cities: decentralised fossil fuel based energy supply. In order to achieve this,
deep structural change is required in all strata of society: technical infrastructures, economic
setups, value chains and business models, types of collaboration between the different
concerned urban actors, social rules, policies and cultural habits, up to the behavioural
routines of citizens and enterprises and the (often hidden) value systems that ultimately
steer all of these strata. Hereby the questions regarding energy cannot be disconnected
from those regarding the adopted economic models, social justice and respect of the earth’s
ecological carrying capacity. In other words, effectively solving this puzzle simultaneously
requires realising overall integrated sustainable functioning at the level of the district or
the city [20].
The four types of PEDs are created to be able to support the following main transition
challenges.
From the simple, individual short term solution to complex, collective long term
formats: it becomes increasingly obvious that many preferable set-ups for PEDs and, at
the higher scale level, climate neutral cities, require different configurations and business
models than current standard practice. The four types of PEDs, in particular the PEDvirtual
and PEDdynamic , will be able to support a shift in preferred assets from individual ones such
as the individual heat pump, the individual PV installation on the individually energy-

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

11 of 16

retrofitted home or the individual electric car, towards collective and integrated assets
such as micro district heating and cooling networks, shared renewable energy generation
installations managed by local energy communities, sustainable collective- or co-housing,
and shared or collective mobility solutions including mobility-as-a-service (MaaS).
Aligning interests and agendas of the different urban stakeholders: in order to
achieve these solutions, the interests, agendas and investment horizons of a multitude
of urban actors in complex stakeholder networks must become sufficiently aligned in
order to arrive at a shared development process. This requires new organisational set-ups
and business models, new collaboration formats with new types of legitimacy and an
overall strong co-creation and governance process that facilitates all of the former. The
integrated set-up of the PEDdynamic and PEDvirtual , with intensive interaction between
building, grid, mobility, ICT and citizen experts and end users, will favour cooperative
financial and partnership models to optimise economic sustainability. It is to be noted that
also established PED definitions such as the ones formulated by the SET-Plan, the European
Commission and JPI UE refer to quantitative (energy and carbon related) aspects as much
as qualitative (sustainable development related) aspects. This implies that those definitions
recognise the fact that both challenges, stated in the context of the present analysis, need
to receive a full address. Studying the full spectrum of deep systemic change in cities is
however beyond the scope of the present article. It is nevertheless necessary and sufficient
to indicate that PED challenges must be linked to the wider issues at stake for sustainable
urban development, of which reaching climate neutrality is one important pillar. Taking
into account the two main challenges as stated above will hereby provide for a good starting
point. It assures that PED strategies and agendas can be fully integrated in urban (climate)
action planning.
6. Current Work on an EU-Wide PED Framework Definition: From PED Types to
Context Factors—Situating PEDs in Their Wider Energy Generation Landscape
Through the PED definition work undertaken under the umbrella of JPI UE, an
alternative approach has emerged to accommodate for the different contexts in which PEDs
operate. These developments have been documented and shared for consultation through
a working paper [51]. This reviewed draft version processes feedback from dedicated
stakeholder workshops on 17 and 20 September 2021 (EERA Joint Programme Smart Cities,
Nordic Edge conference) as well as main comments from an IEA workshop on 22 October
2021 (IEA Annex 83 on Positive Energy Districts).
Instead of addressing these boundary conditions by distinguishing 4 subtypes with
increasing degrees of self-sufficiency, the approach is reversed. Whereas the subtypes start
from a bottom-up vision, analysing how much ‘exterior help’ a PED needs given its starting
condition, a top-down manner of addressing the same constraint consists of situating the
PED in its wider energy landscape and deriving a proportional contribution of the PED to
the total renewable and sustainable energy generation capacity of the considered region or
country. In this way, a fair ‘effort sharing’ mechanism can be established between the PED
and the other areas of the region, whether they be urban or rural. Hereby, ‘context factors’
define the specific characteristics of the PED, allowing to propose a justified amount of
effort sharing that can be assigned to the PED. The basis of this mechanism is derived from
work on system boundaries in the energy system [52,53].
More precisely, these context factors will account for:
•

•

Urban density: the higher the urban density, the more difficult it becomes to generate
all needed energy on-site. Therefore a reversely proportional context factor can be
applied, allowing the district to self-generate lower shares of its operating energy with
increasing urban densities;
Heritage: the more heritage buildings or protected views are present in a district,
the more restrictions there will appear on building envelope interventions and the
installation of renewable energy generation capacity such as PV panels. Therefore,

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

12 of 16

•

•

another reversely proportional context factor will allow to reduce the self-generation
share of the district with increasing heritage value.
Mobility: it should be pointed out how much of the mobility energy for the users
of the PED shall be generated onsite. This is a discussion that remains far from
established, even for PEDs that can be considered as having the potential of generating
100% of their own energy needs. As mobility strongly relates to higher functional scale
levels than the district itself, it may be expected that the mobility energy produced in
a PED will always remain a share of the total mobility energy needed by its users, be
they inhabitants, commuters or visitors;
Climate and embedding in the regional or national energy system: each region has its
own challenges to address in terms of generating sufficient renewable and sustainable
energy. In this way, the regional energy equation may be more difficult to solve in
a context of cold and dark winters with high heating demand and little available
resources to supply heat pumps, versus warm and sunny summers with dominant
cooling demand and ample potential for PV-input. The complete energy balance for
the region will thus influence the share of energy production that is assigned to a PED.

Such an approach implies that national or regional effort sharing mechanisms must
be established and quantified, which lifts the needed level of solution building to a higher
scale. From an overall viewpoint of reaching climate-neutral functioning in the most
ecologically efficient and cost effective manner, this is indeed a logical step to take. Heat
and cold balances will to a large degree be addressed by a regional approach, while for
electricity an EU and beyond approach remains preferable. It is to be noted that sector
coupling may further change the working parameters. For example, the future import of
green hydrogen may become an important factor in the overall energy equation.
Whereas current PED definitions hint at integrated sustainable urban development, the
above method with context factors goes even further by situating cities in their regional or
national energy hinterland – and beyond. This leads to an approach of full-scale subsidiarity,
whereby the integration of macro-, meso- and micro-scale energy generation is being
realised at the methodological optimum [9].
7. Conclusions and Outlook
The present article discusses PED development from a practical implementation
viewpoint, reflecting on the evolving definition framework and suggesting approaches
that may help to make PED development more feasible while at the same time integrating
PEDs meaningfully in their surrounding (energy) systems and living environments. This
is considered both at the technical level of a positive yearly energy balance and zero
greenhouse gas emissions, and at the level of PEDs supporting integrated urban sustainable
development, thus becoming an effective building block towards creating climate neutral
and smart cities. Specific indicators related to PEDs, including energy, carbon, LCA,
economic and qualitative indicators, are not in scope for this article and will be addressed
in future developments of the wider European framework definition.
The use of an operational PED definition with 4 subtypes helps to address a PED’s
practical implementation challenges from a bottom-up perspective. The 3 system boundary
modes and 4 ambition levels provide a practical framework for projects, cities, and developers to work with. The 4 PED subtypes, and the Dynamic PED and the Virtual PED in
particular, also allow to effectively address qualitative requirements for PEDs as well as
to enhance their embedding in the surrounding environment both from the technical and
the integrated sustainable development point of view. We discuss this with selected case
studies and examples to show how it can help support project implementation. Further
case studies will be part of future work.
Meanwhile a top-down approach for PEDs is also under development, whereby the
same implementation challenges are being tackled by considering the total renewable
energy potential of a region or country as the starting point for setting the PED’s specific
energy requirements. Thereby context factors account for the different starting positions

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

13 of 16

for PED development, for example when a PED project regards urban retrofit, includes
high-density urban fabric, or contains many heritage buildings.
Both approaches serve the same goal: providing an operational and practical approach
towards building PEDs, while allowing for flexibility in the PED definition requirements.
In terms of the formulated research questions, we conclude that the case-based bottomup approach and the research-based top-down approach do meet each other regarding
practical solutions for the technical energy balancing of PEDs. However, three differences
can be noted. First, the top-down method accounts of the sustainable energy potential
of the wider region or state, thus assuring ‘fair share’ access to this overall potential by
different PEDs. Such an approach prevents a ‘first come first serve’ strategy that could
be the consequence of using the bottom-up definition in a case-by-case fashion, without
considering its impacts on the wider energy system. Such risk occurs foremost in the case
of virtual PEDs, and with limited outside potential for renewable generation. Second,
although an approach based on context factors would therefore be preferable, the latter
method requires that the total energy potential of a region or country is first established
and that proper allocation keys are identified before any individual PED can be built.
However, this would only become relevant if PEDs would become a significant fraction
of the energy transition. The current state rather shows that we are too slow, and any fast
deployment is preferable from our view. Third, the bottom-up approach allows qualitative
requirements for PEDs to be addressed in a flexible and context-sensitive way that allows for
fast deployment. Addressing qualitative aspects of PEDs in the top-down work organised
by JPI Urban Europe is still in its early phases.
Next recommended development steps therefore include:
•

•

•

•

Further mapping on-the-ground experiences in creating and managing PEDs, to
extract viable technical, social and economic pathways to PEDs for use by cities, real
estate developers and other urban decision makers. In particular, further elaborating
context factors to account of the wider sustainable energy potentials and inquiring
practical feasibility of this method;
In this way, developing a definition framework that is at the same time sufficiently
precise to allow PED benchmarking, sufficiently flexible to accommodate for the many
contexts in which PEDs will be developed, and sufficiently simple not to repel urban
actors such as city administrators, project developers or building owners in using the
definition framework;
Further investigating the quality-related factors, co-benefits and potential negative
externalities of PED applications better, and identifying how these may contribute to
generating willingness to invest in PEDs (public, private and citizen funding);
Analysing which efforts are best fit at district or at city level, to see PEDs as important
stepping stones towards climate-neutral cities and regions. This makes PEDs not only
targets in themselves, but establishes them as growth and transition enablers.

Overall, this continued work on framework definitions and real-life demonstrators
will contribute to successful and upscaled PED deployment within the urban sustainability
transition.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.V., D.A. and A.W.; methodology, H.V., D.A. and A.W.;
writing—original draft preparation, review and editing, H.V., D.A. and A.W. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: Parts of the work have been performed within the +CityxChange (Positive City ExChange) [17] project funded by EU H2020 under Grant Agreement No. 824260 under the Smart Cities
and Communities (SCC) topic; parts have been performed under EERA Smart Cities [12], which
acknowledges funding from the Research Council of Norway under project number 296176.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

14 of 16

Acknowledgments: We thank Jens Bartholmes (European Commission) and Paul Cartuyvels (Bouygues
Europe and Smart Cities Marketplace) for their insights and support in clarifying initial steps and
initiatives with us regarding the early development of the PED concept, in which they were primarily
involved. We thank Simon Schneider for insights and a review of relevant aspects of this manuscript.
We further thank Christoph Gollner, Vicky Albert-Seifried, Gerhard Stryi-Hipp and the other members
of the JPI Urban Europe PED Framework Definition working group for insights and discussion
around the PED definition development. For the Vienna workshop, 3 April 2019, we thank the
participants, especially Terence Connolly, Jiří Tencar, Ricardo Bandli, Lorenz Leppin, Ömer Akyürek,
and Dudley Stewart. For the EERA workshop in Brussels, 6 May 2019, we thank the +CityxChange
municipalities of Limerick and Pisek, participants from JPI, from H2020 SCC projects MAKING-CITY
and GrowSmarter, and members of the EERA JPSC. We further thank the cities and partners of the
+CityxChange project for ongoing discussions and insights on PED demonstrator development and
deployment. We finally thank the numerous participants and colleagues from various projects, cities,
institutions, and initiatives that we could discuss this topic with.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors hold leading or contributing roles in the +CityxChange project or in EERA JPSC.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

European Strategic Energy Technology Plan (SET Plan), Action n◦ 3.2—Implementation Plan on Positive Energy Districts.
Available online: https://setis.ec.europa.eu/implementing-actions/set-plan-documents_en (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Smart Cities Marketplace Initiative on Positive Energy Blocks. Available online: https://smart-cities-marketplace.ec.europa.eu/
action-clusters-and-initiatives/action-clusters/sustainable-built-environment/positive-energy (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Vandevyvere, H.; Ahlers, D.; Alpagut, B.; Cerna, V.; Cimini, V.; Haxhija, S.; Hukkalainen, M.; Kuzmic, M.; Livik, K.; Padilla, M.;
et al. Positive Energy Districts Solution Booklet. Technical Report, EU SCIS Smart Cities Information System. 2020. Available
online: https://smart-cities-marketplace.ec.europa.eu/insights/solutions/solution-booklet-positive-energy-districts (accessed
on 15 April 2022).
PED-EU-NET | Cost Action CA19126—Positive Energy Districts European Network. Available online: https://pedeu.net/
(accessed on 15 April 2022).
Polly, B.; Kutscher, C.; Macumber, D.; Schott, M.; Pless, S.; Livingood, B.; Van Geet, O. From zero energy buildings to zero energy
districts. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings, Pacific Grove, CA, USA, 21–26
August 2016; pp. 21–26.
Ratti, C.; Baker, N.; Steemers, K. Energy consumption and urban texture. Energy Build. 2005, 37, 762–776. [CrossRef]
Salat, S. Energy loads, CO2 emissions and building stocks: Morphologies, typologies, energy systems and behaviour. Build. Res.
Inf. 2009, 37, 598–609. [CrossRef]
Salat, S.; Nowacki, C. De l’importance de la morphologie dans l’efficience énergétique des villes. Liaison Energ. Francoph. 2010,
141–146.
Vandevyvere, H.; Stremke, S. Urban Planning for a Renewable Energy Future: Methodological Challenges and Opportunities
from a Design Perspective. Sustainability 2012, 4, 1309–1328. [CrossRef]
Conci, M.; Schneider, J. A District Approach to Building Renovation for the Integral Energy Redevelopment of Existing Residential
Areas. Sustainability 2017, 9, 747. [CrossRef]
Perera, A.; Javanroodi, K.; Wang, Y.; Hong, T. Urban cells: Extending the energy hub concept to facilitate sector and spatial
coupling. Adv. Appl. Energy 2021, 3, 100046. [CrossRef]
EERA Joint Programme Smart Cities. Available online: https://www.eera-sc.eu/ (accessed on 15 April 2022).
JPI Urban Europe—Positive Energy Districts (PED). Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/ped/ (accessed on 15 April 2022).
IEA EBC—Annex 83—Positive Energy Districts. Available online: https://annex83.iea-ebc.org/ (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Stryi-Hipp, G.; Albert-Seifried, V. Unpublished Work; Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems (ISE): Freiburg,
Baden-Württemberg, Germany, 2021.
Ahlers, D.; Driscoll, P.; Wibe, H.; Wyckmans, A. Co-Creation of Positive Energy Blocks. In Proceedings of the 1st Nordic
conference on Zero Emission and Plus Energy Buildings, Trondheim, Norway, 6–7 November 2019; IOP Conference Series: Earth
and Environmental Science; Volume 352. [CrossRef]
+CityxChange Project. Available online: https://cityxchange.eu/ (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Lombardi, P.; Brandon, P. The multimodal system approach to sustainability planning evaluation. In Sustainable Urban Development
Volume 2: The Environmental Assessment Methods; Deakin, M., Mitchell, G., Nijkamp, P., Vreeker, R., Eds.; Routledge: London, UK, 2007.
Basden, A. The critical theory of Herman Dooyeweerd? J. Inf. Technol. 2002, 17, 257–269. [CrossRef]
Vandevyvere, H. How to cut across the catch-all? A philosophical-cultural framework for assessing sustainability. Int. J. Innov.
Sustain. Dev. 2011, 5, 403–424. [CrossRef]
Vandevyvere, H. Evaluating the Sustainable Performance of an Urban District: Measured Score or Reflexive Governance? Int. J.
Sustain. Dev. Plan. 2013, 8, 36–58. [CrossRef]

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

30.
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.
38.

39.

40.
41.

15 of 16

European Commission. Energy Performance of Buildings Directive. Available online: https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/
energy-efficiency/energy-efficient-buildings/energy-performance-buildings-directive_en (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Investing in a Sustainable Energy Future for Europe. Available online: https://european-union.europa.eu/priorities-andactions/actions-topic/energy_en (accessed on 15 April 2022).
CORDIS: NEXT-BUILDINGS Project. Available online: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/284533 (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Hikari, Premier îlot à Énergie Positive, Lyon Confluence. Available online: https://www.lyon-confluence.fr/en/node/4736
(accessed on 15 April 2022).
Cartuyvels, P. (Smart Cities Marketplace Action Cluster on Sustainable Built Environment, Brussels, Belgium). Personal
communication, 2021.
EIP SCC, Sustainable Districts and Built Environment: Positive Energy Blocks, Infosheet. Available online: https://smart-citiesmarketplace.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/PostiveEB.pdf (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Cartuyvels, P. (Smart Cities Marketplace Action Cluster on Sustainable Built Environment, Brussels, Belgium); Bartholmes, J.
(European Commission—DG Energy, Brussels, Belgium). Personal communication, 2021.
European Commission and Directorate-General for Energy and Joint Research Centre. SET Plan Delivering Results: The
Implementation Plans: Research & Innovation Enabling the EU’s Energy Transition. Publications Office. 2018. Available online:
https://www.google.com.hk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=2ahUKEwjulojjhbv4
AhXHnFYBHXCfCs4QFnoECAgQAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ccus-setplan.eu%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2019%2F1
0%2Fsetplan_delivering_results_2018.pdf&usg=AOvVaw0gAIWwG4HSC3NiY_NQHDAL (accessed on 15 April 2022).
INEA, Smart Cities & Communities. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/inea/en/horizon-2020/smart-cities-communities
(accessed on 15 April 2022).
European Commission. Funding and Tenders: Smart Cities and Communities, TOPIC ID: LC-SC3-SCC-1-2018-2019-2020.
Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-details/lcsc3-scc-1-2018-2019-2020 (accessed on 15 April 2022).
European Commission. FAQ—Frequently Asked Questions, Work Programme (WP) 2018 for Horizon 2020, Smart Cities and
Communities—Lighthouse Projects, Topic Identifier: LC-SC3-SCC-1-2018-2019-2020. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/
research/participants/portal4/doc/call/h2020/lc-sc3-scc-1-2018-2019-2020/1800106-faq_ssc1_2018_v07_en.pdf (accessed on 15
April 2022).
European Commission. EU Horizon 2020 Work Programme 2018-2020–10. Secure, Clean and Efficient Energy. Available online:
https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/data/ref/h2020/wp/2018-2020/main/h2020-wp1820-energy_en.pdf (accessed on
15 April 2022).
JPI Urban Europe. Europe towards Positive Energy Districts. A Compilation of Projects towards Sustainable Urbanization and
the Energy Transition. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/PED-Booklet-Update-Feb2020_2.pdf (accessed on 15 April 2022).
JPI Urban Europe—PED Programme Cities Workshop: Towards a European Positive Energy Cities Network. Available
online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/news/short-review-ped-programme-cities-workshop-towards-a-european-positive-energycities-network/ (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Wyckmans, A.; Ahlers, D. D9.2: Report on Intra-Project Collaboration, Including Study Visits and Peer to Peer Workshops.
Technical Report +CityxChange Project Deliverable 9.2, +CityxChange Project. 2019. Available online: https://cityxchange.eu/
knowledge-base/report-on-intra-project-collaboration-including-study-visits-and-peer-to-peer-workshops/ (accessed on 15
April 2022).
Vandevyvere, H.; Connolly, T.; Tencar, J.; Bandli, R.; Leppin, L.; Akyürek, Ö.; Stewart, D. PED Definition Development, 2019. In
Proceedings of the JPI UE workshop, Vienna, Austria, 3 April 2019.
JPI Urban Europe / SET Plan Action 3.2. White Paper on Reference Framework for Positive Energy Districts and Neighbourhoods.
Key lessons from national consultations. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/app/uploads/2020/04/White-PaperPED-Framework-Definition-2020323-final.pdf (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Wyckmans, A.; Karatzoudi, K.; Brigg, D.; Ahlers, D. D9.5: Report on Attendance at Events Held by Other SCC-01 CoOrdinators 2. Technical Report +CityxChange Project Deliverable 9.5, +CityxChange Project. 2019. Available online:
https://cityxchange.eu/knowledge-base/report-on-attendance-at-events-held-by-other-scc-01-co-ordinators-2/, (accessed
on 15 April 2022).
+CityxChange/European Commission. Positive City ExChange | CityxChange Project | Fact Sheet | H2020 | CORDIS. Available
online: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/824260 (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Vandevyvere, H. PED Definitions and approaches: An overview. Presented at SCIS Webinar ‘Actions & Recommendations:
Creating a Joint Vision for PEDs’, Moderated by Jelle Jaubin; EUSEW 2020; 30.06.2020, online. Available online: https://smartcities-marketplace.ec.europa.eu/news-and-events/news/2020/eusew-2020-webinar-creating-joint-vision-peds-recap (accessed
on 15 April 2022).

Energies 2022, 15, 4491

42.

43.

44.
45.
46.
47.

48.

49.
50.
51.
52.

53.

16 of 16

Vandevyvere, H.; Reynders, G.; Baeten, R.; De Jaeger, I.; Ma, Y. The Trade-Off between Urban Building Stock Retrofit, Local
Renewable Energy Production and the Roll-Out of 4G District Heating Networks. Case Study Modelling for 9 Urban Districts in
Flanders, Belgium. Position Paper. EnergyVille. Available online: https://www.energyville.be/en/press/trade-between-urbanbuilding-stock-retrofit-local-renewable-energy-production-and-roll-out-4g (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Bertelsen, S.; Livik, K.; Myrstad, M. D2.1 Report on Enabling Regulatory Mechanism to Trial Innovation in Cities. Technical
Report +CityxChange Project Deliverable 2.1, +CityxChange Project. 2019. Available online: https://cityxchange.eu/knowledgebase/report-on-enabling-regulatory-mechanism-to-trial-innovation-in-cities/ (accessed on 15 April 2022).
European Commission. Clean Energy for All Europeans Package. Available online: https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/energystrategy/clean-energy-all-europeans-package_en (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Energiedelen en Persoon-aan-Persoonverkoop | VREG. Available online: https://www.vreg.be/nl/energiedelen-en-persoonaan-persoonverkoop (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Wetsvoorstel Energiewet (UHT) | Publicatie | Rijksoverheid.nl. Available online: https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/
publicaties/2021/11/26/wetsvoorstel-energiewet-uht (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Guldbrandsøy, E.N.; Granado, P.C.D.; Pedrero, R.A.; Backe, S.; Pinel, D.; Lauvland, M.; Rosales, M.G.; Danielsen, S.; Sizov, G. D5.3
Campus Microgrid Model Prototype. Technical Report +CityxChange Project Deliverable 5.3, +CityxChange Project. 2022. Available
online: https://cityxchange.eu/knowledge-base/d5-3-campus-microgrid-model-prototype/ (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Gall, T.; Carbonari, G.; Wyckmans, A.; Ahlers, D. Co-Creating Local Energy Transitions Through Smart Cities: Piloting a
Prosumer-Oriented Approach. In Review of World Planning Practice Volume 16: Post-Oil Urbanism; ISOCARP Review; Hanzl, M.,
Reilly, J., Agrawal, M., Eds.; ISOCARP: The Hague, The Netherlands, 2020; Volume 16, Chapter 7, pp. 108–123. Available online:
https://cityxchange.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Co-Creating-Local-Energy-Transitions-Through-Smart-Cities.pdf (accessed on 15 April 2022).
Lindholm, O.; Rehman, H.u.; Reda, F. Positioning Positive Energy Districts in European Cities. Buildings 2021, 11, 19. [CrossRef]
Brozovsky, J.; Gustavsen, A.; Gaitani, N. Zero emission neighbourhoods and positive energy districts—A state-of-the-art review.
Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021, 72, 103013. [CrossRef]
Gollner, C.; Vandevyvere, H. Towards a European PED Definition; Version 26.10.2021; Working Paper for consultation; 2021,
unpublished.
Schneider, S.; Zelger, T.; Leibold, J.; Schöfmann, P. PED Definition and Methodology—Preliminary results from 3 years and
5 projects of PED research. In Presentation for the PED Framework Definition Alignment Group; Internal Presentation; 2021,
unpublished.
Schneider, S.; Bartlmä, N.; Leibold, J.; Schöfman, P.; Tabakovic, M.; Zelger, T. New Assessment Method for Buildings and Districts
towards Net Zero Energy Buildings Compatible with the Energy Scenario 2050. 2019. In Proceedings of the REAL CORP 2019,
Karlsruhe, Germany, 2–4 April 2019.

