sustainability
Article

Towards a Just Energy Transition, Barriers and Opportunities
for Positive Energy District Creation in Spain
Adam X. Hearn 1, *

and Raul Castaño-Rosa 2,3
1
2

3

*



Citation: Hearn, A.X.; Castaño-Rosa,

Sustainability Research Group, University of Basel, CH-4051 Basel, Switzerland
Appropriate Technologies for Sustainable Development Group, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid,
28903 Madrid, Spain; raul.castanodelarosa@tuni.fi
Faculty of Built Environment, Tampere University, Korkeakoulunkatu 1, 33720 Tampere, Finland
Correspondence: adam.hearn@unibas.ch; Tel.: +49-152-5230-0448

Abstract: To mitigate the effects of climate change, the European Commission created a Strategic
Energy Technology Plan committing to forming 100 Positive Energy Districts (PEDs) by 2025. These
are considered to potentially be major instruments for decarbonization in a just transition. This plan
has led to some districts being defined as PEDs, although none have fully met the criteria to be a
PED yet. Research shows that new forms of energy ownership and production, as could potentially
be found in PEDs, could help reduce energy poverty, which affects a significant segment of the
population, as households can reduce their energy expenditure as well as improve their energy
behavior. This paper set out to shed light on the PED landscape, investigating the barriers and
opportunities to PED creation in Spain and its potential to mitigate energy poverty. We conducted a
literature review on community-owned energy in Spain, followed with expert interviews (energy
researchers, stakeholders, and NGOs) who focus on sustainability issues in Spain. Results show
a number of barriers (lack of knowledge and awareness, and lack of trust from consumers) and
opportunities connected with the creation of PEDs. In conclusion, policymaker engagement and
support play a key role in successfully implementing PEDs.

R. Towards a Just Energy Transition,
Barriers and Opportunities for
Positive Energy District Creation in

Keywords: Positive Energy Districts (PEDs); Local Energy Communities (LECs); energy justice;
energy transition; energy poverty

Spain. Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su13168698
Academic Editor: Alessandro Franco
Received: 30 June 2021
Accepted: 29 July 2021
Published: 4 August 2021

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).

1. Introduction
A significant decline in the costs associated with PV production and innovative PV
efficiency improvements, coupled with the high number of solar days makes a strong
case for PV energy in Spain [1] to meet and exceed national energy requirements [2].
However, until 2018, regressive legislation (specifically RD900/2015) protected dominant
market interests and penalized PV energy production. The Royal Decree 244/2019 (RD244)
ended taxation on self-production, and also defined the conditions for creating energy
communities in Spain [1].
In a concerted attempt to speed up the decarbonization of urban areas within the EU, a
project to establish 100 Positive Energy Districts (PEDs) in Europe by the year 2025 [3] was
set in motion by the Joint Programming Initiative Urban Europe [4]. PEDs are defined as
highly energy efficient districts that are wholly powered by Renewably Energy Technology
(henceforth RET), and produce a yearly net surplus of energy, whilst also offering affordable
living for residents [5]. The concept of PEDs arose as a natural extension from pre-existing
low-carbon developments, such as Positive Energy Buildings [4] and Positive Energy
Blocks [6], and is seen as a step towards Nearly Zero Energy Cities (NZECs) [7] and
Positive Energy Cities (PECs). The creation of an initial 100 PEDs across Europe also
focuses on replicability as these have been identified as a potentially significant tool in
decarbonizing urban areas in Europe, which could be further expanded once these have
been fully evaluated [5]. A PED booklet containing 61 different projects in Europe [4,8]

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13168698

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

2 of 18

includes four in Spain; Atelier project in Bilbao (in implementation [9]), Paterna, Valencia
(in planning), Mieres, Asturias District heating (implemented towards PED), and Mostoles
Madrid Ecoenergias District Heating (implemented towards PED).
There are potentially three different types of PEDs. Autonomous PEDs are entirely
self-sufficient and produce all their energy on-site, whilst Dynamic PEDs may import
energy, but produce a net surplus on a yearly basis. Virtual PEDs incorporate RET, which
is located outside of the boundaries of the PED [10]. Whilst it is clear that PEDs are to
be renewably powered, and the topic of where energy production is to be situated has
been examined [10], novel forms of community energy ownership could support PED
development.
Energy communities in the form of Renewable Energy Communities (RECs) and
Citizen Energy Communities (CECs) are enshrined in EU directives [11]. PEDs, CECs
and RECs have similar goals of reducing emissions, as well as increasing active citizen
participation in decentralizing energy markets, leading to the terms often being wrongly
used interchangeably (see Table 1). Both RECs and CECs are often referred to as Local
Energy Communities (Comunidades Energéticas in Spanish, henceforth LECs), but the
term LEC is more closely aligned with the legal term REC. Table 1 (below) summarizes the
main similarities and differences between prosumers, energy cooperatives, RECs, CECs
and PEDs.
Table 1. Differences between Prosumers, RECs, CECs and PEDs (Authors own elaboration).
Self-Consumption/
Prosumers [12]

Membership

Household, or within
same building

Energy
Cooperative [13]

Renewable Energy
Community
(REC) [14]

Multiple
households

Individuals, local
authorities,
enterprises, but must
not be primary commercial/professional
activity. Must be
accessible to
low-income
households

Citizen Energy
Community
(CEC) [15]

Positive Energy
District (PED) [10]

Individuals, local
authorities,
enterprises

Can incorporate
households,
individuals, local
authorities,
enterprises.
Must be inclusive

Location of energy
production

On the property

Can be anywhere

Must be local

Can be anywhere

Must be local for
Autonomous and
Dynamic PEDS, but
can be anywhere for
Virtual PEDs

Innovations/
Technologies

Mainly PV, solar hot
water, energy storage,
heatpumps

Bottom up
network of
sustainable
innovation

Only renewable
energy
(May not meet full
demand)

Any form of energy
(May not meet full
demand)

Only renewables
(Must aim to
eventually exceed
demand)

All segments of the
energy chain

May engage in
generation,
distribution, supply,
consumption,
aggregation, energy
storage, energy
efficiency services or
charging services for
electric vehicles or
provide other energy
services to its
members or
shareholders

Not legally
determined as may
include Prosumers,
RECs and CECs

Legally permitted
activities in energy
sector

Production, consumption
of own energy, sale of
excess to grid or
Peer-to-peer trading
Installed capacity per
household/user is
limited unless they are in
a cooperative or a
CEC [16]

Production and
Marketing

The flexibility afforded to PEDs in not having any specified legally permitted activities
in the energy sector allows for the inclusion of both RECs and CECs within them. Although
there is no requirement for PEDs to include any form of community energy, it is very
likely that these will be used to support PED development and they have been linked

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

3 of 18

to PEDs in research [17]. However, PEDs may also include individual prosumers, and
renewable energy supplied by utilities or energy cooperatives. In this paper we focus on
PEDs, and include LECs as we believe these increase the potential for PEDs to form part of
a just transition.
The growth of LECs across Europe is no longer isolated to specific countries [18], and
there is evidence to show that the number of LECs within the EU has dramatically increased
since the Clean Energy for All Europeans package [19] was launched in 2019. Although
the distribution of LECs across Europe remains uneven, they are established as important
stakeholders in the energy systems of nations such as Germany and Denmark [20], whilst
being in early development in others such as Spain, where a public consultation on LECs
took place in December 2020 [21,22].
The residential building sector accounts for 18.3% [23] of energy demand in Spain,
and the need to decarbonize this is undisputable. However, the benefits of doing so
through the creation of PEDs are manifold. PEDs can potentially bring about significant
technical, financial and social benefits as a part of a decentralized energy system [24,25].
On the technical side, a distributed energy system can alleviate pressure on centralized
grids, increasing security reliability and resilience in the event of price volatility or energy
emergencies [26]. From a financial perspective, although costs per unit and installation
costs are liable to vary widely, more companies are likely to be involved, with benefits
spread over significantly greater numbers of interested parties, leading to greater financial
resilience [27]. In Spain, it is currently cheaper to produce a KWh of energy through PV
than purchasing it from the grid [26], making decentralized forms of energy production
attractive as an investment to households and communities. Both of these aspects (technological and financial) are equally applicable in the case of prosumers. However, the big
difference between individual prosumers and LECs is that for PEDs, shared forms of energy
production, management and distribution can be tailored to ensure that energy poverty is
mitigated, as well as to assist in the (re)creation of flourishing shared communities that go
beyond energy, incorporating other social benefits [28].
Energy poverty refers to a household that is unable to meet its energy needs, and
has been identified as a significant problem throughout Europe, including in Mediterranean countries like Spain [29,30]. LECs have been considered from the perspective of
energy poverty [25,31], as a tool for mitigating energy poverty [32,33], especially within
the Mediterranean, such as in Greece [34,35], Italy [36] and Portugal [37]. From the literature it is clear that LECs are able to identify local energy needs and foster community
participation [38], and as such could be utilized as an enduring method to reduce energy
poverty. Therefore, LECs can potentially provide free or reduced cost energy and an additional income stream (should energy be sold) for those in energy poverty. On a PED scale,
research in Portugal indicates the potential of PEDs as a tool for mitigating energy poverty
in the historic district of Alfama in Lisbon [39].
Research in smart energy systems has included different technologies (i.e., energy
storage [40]; district heating [41], or the Internet of Things [42]), but there has been little
research into LECs or PEDs development in the Spanish context so far. Indeed, in the case
of Spain, academic attention has often focused on individual prosumers [43] or energy
cooperatives such as Som Energia [13,44–47], largely because legislation has meant that
such cooperatives were able to function where LECs were not. Research into LECs and
PEDs in Spain is sparse, with little research on their potential effect on energy poverty
mitigation or from an energy justice perspective.
In this respect, this research aims at identifying what the existing barriers are to PED
creation as part of a just transition in Spain, based on expert interviews with developers
of LECs and PEDs, and energy researchers. We detail our methodology below, followed
by the framework behind our approach and a literature review. The potential for PEDs
to form part of a just energy transition and mitigate EP is discussed using an analysis
of the interviews conducted, based on our framework. This is followed by a section on
LECs, PEDs and energy poverty, which is seen as a form of capability deprivation [48] that

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

mitigation or from an energy justice perspective.
In this respect, this research aims at identifying what the existing barriers are to PED
creation as part of a just transition in Spain, based on expert interviews with developers
of LECs and PEDs, and energy researchers. We detail our methodology below, followed
by the framework behind our approach and a literature review. The potential for PEDs to 4 of 18
form part of a just energy transition and mitigate EP is discussed using an analysis of the
interviews conducted, based on our framework. This is followed by a section on LECs,
PEDs and energy poverty, which is seen as a form of capability deprivation [48] that encompasses all
ofof
thethe
energy
justice
framework
we use.
providing
encompasses
allaspects
aspects
energy
justice
framework
we We
use.conclude,
We conclude,
providing
some policy recommendations for PEDs in the Spanish context.

some policy recommendations for PEDs in the Spanish context.
Materials and Methods
2. 2.
Materials
and Methods

To address this gap, we first conducted a literature review by using Scopus searches
To address this gap, we first conducted a literature review by using Scopus searches
for the terms “Positive Energy Districts”; “Energy Communities” and “Spain”; and “Enforergy
the terms
“Positiveand
Energy
Districts”;
“Energy
and
and of
“Energy
Communities”
“Energy
Poverty”
(Figure Communities”
1), which resulted
in “Spain”;
the inclusion
Communities”
and
“Energy
Poverty”
(Figure
1),
which
resulted
in
the
inclusion
of
thirty-nine articles. In addition, we conducted a snowball search of articles related to LECs thirtynine
articles.
In addition,
wewith
conducted
a grey
snowball
search of articles
related
to LECs
elsewhere
in Europe,
together
searches of
and non-academic
literature
on PEDs
elsewhere
together
withshows
searches
of greythe
andmethodology
non-academic
on PEDs
and LECsininEurope,
Spain. Figure
1 below
graphically
usedliterature
for the Scoand
LECs
in Spain.
Figure 1 below shows graphically the methodology used for the Scopus
pus
literature
review.

literature review.
Identification
Limited by age range
2011– (June) 2021

Scopus search “Positive Energy
Districts”

Screening:
Duplicates removed
Must be in English or Spanish
Must be identified as
“article”
Must be in field of Energy or
Social sciences
Abstracts evaluated for
relevance
Duplicates removed

424 articles

Scopus search “Energy
Communities” and “Spain”

Scopus search “Energy
Communities” and “Energy
Poverty”
735 articles

532 articles

146 articles

35 articles

75 articles

75 articles

Total Examined:

77 articles

Included in this article:

39 articles

261 articles

68 articles

Figure
searchmethodology.
methodology.
Figure1.
1. Literature
Literature search

Secondly,
candidatestotointerview
interview
were
initially
located
the
Secondly,potential
potential candidates
were
initially
located
onlineonline
using using
the
four
Spanish
projects
listed
in
the
PED
booklet
as
a
starting
point,
together
with
a
major
four Spanish projects listed in the PED booklet as a starting point, together with a major
energy
Energia,which
which
was
able
to put
uscontact
in contact
a number
of
energycooperative,
cooperative, Som
Som Energia,
was
able
to put
us in
with with
a number
of
LECs.
1313semi-structured
interviewsfrom
from
thirty
to sixty
minutes
duration,
LECs.
semi-structured in-depth
in-depth interviews
thirty
to sixty
minutes
duration,
with with a
a total
of key
16 key
stakeholders(12
(12 male,
male, 44female)
from
LECs,
cooperatives,
local, local,
regional
total
of 16
stakeholders
female)
from
LECs,
cooperatives,
regional
and
national
government,
private
enterprise
(PED
designers),
researchers
and
NGOs,
and national government, private enterprise (PED designers), researchers and NGOs, were
were conducted
(see 2).
Table
We struggled
to female
get female
respondents,
whichisisbroadly
broadly in line
conducted
(see Table
We2).struggled
to get
respondents,
which
with research indicating that women’s viewpoints are often absent or underrepresented
in energy transition pathways [49]. Ethical approval for the interviews was granted by
the SMART BEEjS consortium. Table 2 provides an overview of the different interviewee
typologies according to their main roles.
Interviews were conducted online using the Zoom platform, transcribed and translated before coding and content analysis using MaxQDA2020. Many of those interviewees
had multiple roles, such as working for local authorities and LECs, as well as being members of different energy cooperatives.

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

5 of 18

Table 2. List of different interviewee typologies.
Principle Interviewee Role

Researcher:

Number of
Interviews

4

Public office (i.e., councilor
for energy and sustainability)
Energy-related NGO
Private firm

1
1

EC organisation

4

Cooperative association

1

2

Codes Assigned to
Interviewees
ER1,
ER2,
ER3,
ER4
P1,
P2; Mo1, Mo2
NGO1
PR1; M1, F1
EC1,
EC2,
EC3,
EC4:V1, V2
C1

Region Located in

Gender

Madrid
Madrid
Castilla y Leon,
Barcelona
Madrid
Madrid
Madrid
Valencia

Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Male, Male
Male
Male, Female

Andalucia Navarra,
Andalucia
Catalonia

Male, Male, Male
Male, Male

Catalonia

Female

3. Literature Review: The Case of Spain
A prominent framework that has been used to analyze LECs in Spain is the Multilevel
Perspective (MLP) [50]. The MLP has been used in some research on LECs in Spain, in
which the socio-technical system is divided into niches, regimes, and landscapes [13,45].
These form a nested hierarchy in which shared energy initiatives such as cooperatives and
LECs are perceived as forming and operating in a niche. Innovations formed in the niche
are sometimes able to become a dominant aspect of the regime, depending on their ability
to compete with pre-existing forms that dominate the regime (in this case the oligarchy of
major energy suppliers). The regime in this case is also under pressure from the landscape
level, which refers to the external factors that influence the regime such as climate change
and EU directives.
However, in order to ensure the creation of PEDs is justice-informed that they might be
a part of a fair and inclusive transition, an energy justice framework may be more feasible.
An energy justice framework incorporating the MLP is put forwards by Jenkins, Sovacool and McCauley [51], and this approach notes the importance of further research that
considers non-traditional actors such as users and marginalized groups in transitions. We
build on this by incorporating energy poverty, but we consider PEDs to be socio-technical
niches [52], which may be routed in technology, but which are also social innovations.
Owing to this, we focus on an energy justice approach which is informed by the capability
approach (CA) [53]. The CA has been used as a metric for wellbeing and justice in research
focusing on LECs in the global South [54–56], as well as on energy justice research that
focuses on energy poverty [48] providing a multidimensional definition of energy poverty
as a capability deprivation. Ensuring that PEDs are embedded within energy justice, by
using a CA based framework, may assist in meeting the European Green Deal requirement
of a “just and inclusive” transition [57].
Our approach is to examine different aspects of the physical, economic, social and
technical setting through a justice informed lens, which includes the triumvirate of energy
justice tenets (distributional, procedural, and recognitional justice [58]), but also includes
global, redistributive, intergenerational and intragenerational justice [59,60].
For the case of PEDs, distributional justice focuses on the benefits and burdens of being
included in an energy community in terms of where the energy producing technology is
placed. We also consider recognitional justice, asking about how inclusive PEDs are/plan to
be. Further, we enquire on procedural justice aspects, how decision-making processes are
created and to what degree these are transparent in the face of the energy industry in Spain.
Additionally, we attempt to understand to what extent intergenerational and intragenerational justice are considered in the forming of PEDs, whilst also raising the question of
global justice which is significant when it comes to the extraction of raw materials and the

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

included in an energy community in terms of where the energy producing technology is
placed. We also consider recognitional justice, asking about how inclusive PEDs are/plan
to be. Further, we enquire on procedural justice aspects, how decision-making processes
are created and to what degree these are transparent in the face of the energy industry in
Spain. Additionally, we attempt to understand to what extent intergenerational 6and
of 18intragenerational justice are considered in the forming of PEDs, whilst also raising the question of global justice which is significant when it comes to the extraction of raw materials
and the production of PV panels [61]. For those that are adversely affected, we question
production
of PV panels
[61].principles
For those could
that are
adversely
affected,
we for
question
whether
whether restorative
justice
increase
overall
support
such projects.
restorative
justice
principles
could
increase
overall
support
for
such
projects.
To do this, Figure 2 depicts the framework used for the analysis that incorporates
To dojustice
this, Figure
2 depicts
framework
the(Figure
analysis
incorporates
en-the
energy
into the
ex-antethe
assessment
of used
PEDsfor
[59]
2, that
below),
examining
ergy
justice
into
the
ex-ante
assessment
of
PEDs
[59]
(Figure
2,
below),
examining
the
aforeaforementioned energy justice dimensions considered in terms of opportunity spaces (or
mentioned energy justice dimensions considered in terms of opportunity spaces (or Capitals).
Capitals).

Figure
2. Livelihoods-Capabilities
based
energy
justice
framework
from
Hearn,
Sohre
andand
Burger
2021.
Figure
2. Livelihoods-Capabilities
based
energy
justice
framework
from
Hearn,
Sohre
Burger
2021.

Although PEDs are newcomers to the field of energy in Spain, there has been some
Although PEDs are newcomers to the field of energy in Spain, there has been some
research into potential barriers and opportunities for new forms of energy ownership in
research into potential barriers and opportunities for new forms of energy ownership in
Spain such as cooperatives and LECs, as well as research on an international scale, which
Spain such as cooperatives and LECs, as well as research on an international scale, which
may be applicable to PED creation [62]. In terms of barriers, these can be divided into
may be applicable to PED creation [62]. In terms of barriers, these can be divided into
technological, financial, social, political and regulatory. We link these to opportunity spaces
technological, financial, social, political and regulatory. We link these to opportunity
within the energy justice framework:
spaces
within
the energy
justice
Physical
Capital.
This refers
to framework:
issues surrounding the infrastructure and technology
available for the PED.
Natural Capital. This focuses on environmental issues that may arise in connection to
the PED, and natural barriers and opportunities.
Financial Capital refers to the access and availability of finance, income generating
activities and affordability of the PED.
Human Capital examines the knowledge base available for the PED as well as change
agents and opinion leaders. Within this we incorporate political and legislative barriers
and opportunities.
Social Capital focuses on the social and cultural frame conditions for the PED.
Technical barriers or physical capital include the fact that there has not been much
experience in managing reverse power flows from high PV generation in the system [1]
and that the increasing number of prosumers (both collective and individual) could lead
to overall grid costs increasing [12]. Barriers to Financial capital relate to the financial
investment required to set up a PED. In Spain, two main barriers have already been
identified: the high costs of a distributed system [1], and the current energy auction system
which might discriminate smaller citizens initiatives in favor of larger operators [13]. In the

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

7 of 18

area of Social capital, barriers include issues of unequal participation [63] and engrained
patterns of energy consumption behaviors which may be difficult to change [64]. Research
has also identified gender issues with women voices being underrepresented within LEC
initiatives [49]. Political and regulatory barriers relate to the political context. In Spain,
the stagnation of the energy system under the oligopoly [65] has already been outlined
together with regime resistance [13,47]. The regulatory framework (included under human
capital) has been recognized as a significant barrier in the case of Spain [12], despite the
recent legislative changes and the clear need for a supportive legal framework for LECs [12]
and PEDs. Research conducted prior to the change in legislation (RD244 overturned the
so-called “Tax on the Sun”) paints an even bleaker picture of prior legislative barriers to
LEC initiatives [66].
PEDs may bring many opportunities, and these can broadly be divided into environmental, technological, social, financial, political and legislative. From an environmental
perspective (natural capital), there is general consensus on the high potential for significantly reduced greenhouse gas emissions in Spain and the EU [1,46,67]. Technological
opportunities (physical capital) include a potential improvement in the efficiency of the
energy system through local power generation as this will not need to be transported long
distances [1], and a more resilient and adaptable energy system overall [26,63].
Social advantages and opportunities (social capital) that have been researched include
the transformative potential of LECs [13], including increased social justice [47], reciprocity
and added co-activities [26,63]. Furthermore, there has been some research on the potential
benefits of similar energy initiatives in rural areas of Spain [68]. Other research has examined the benefits of incorporating sustainability and renewable energy issues into school
communities, through educational programs which often focus on energy consumption
behavior change, but which also sometimes incorporate the installation of PV panels for
self-consumption [69].
Financial opportunities (financial capital) include reducing national energy imports [70],
improved competitiveness within the national energy market [12], which could be key
to democratizing a new decentralized energy system [13], high rates of job creation, and
benefits being shared between an increased number and range of actors [1]. Political
and legislative opportunities (human capital) are seen as arising directly from European
Directives [63] which means that the Spanish government is likely to encourage new forms
of shared energy ownership [68].
Understanding that the current situation for PEDs positions firmly within the niche
level, we examine each of the social opportunity spaces and what the barriers and opportunities for PEDs are with energy justice in mind, understanding that not all forms of energy
justice will be displayed within each capital.
4. Analysis of the Interviews
In this section, we detail the results from our interviews, initially discussing problems
with terminology, followed by three sections on physical and natural capital, financial
capital, and human and social capitals. We then examine the barriers and opportunities in
using PEDs that include LECs as tools to mitigate energy poverty.
4.1. What Is a PED?
A significant issue in terminology became clear in the interviews. All of the parties
interviewed were involved in the field of energy, and yet almost all of them were unfamiliar
with the term PED, including those working in districts that were listed in the PED booklet.
Of the sixteen people interviewed, one city councilor in Viladecans was aware of the
concept, and responded “Our idea is to produce an excess. For example, we are now implementing
the action of PV panels in municipal facilities with the aid of the Ministry and that comes from
Europe, and we are always looking for the maximum production. Why? Because we are looking for
this model of producing excess energy that we can share with others. Our idea is in some cases to
make bi-directional energy communities” (EC4, V1). A second councilor in the same interview

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

8 of 18

(EC4, V2) quickly interjected that the high energy demand from the industrial sector made
it impossible for the entire town to become a PED. However, if the industrial area were
to be excluded it would seem that the LECs in Viladecans (EC4) could be extended to
form PEDs, or RET from outside the geographic area could be used to create a virtual
PED. Conversely, during the interview with two PED designers from Valencia (PR1), it
became clear that there is interest in the inclusion of LECs in the Valencia PED [71] after
residents move in, with the potential for around 45% of energy needs to be met in this
way. This demonstrates that the PED-LEC link could function both ways, with PEDS
incorporating LECs, but also with the potential for LECs to amalgamate or grow to the
point where they could be considered PEDs.
Only two of the researchers interviewed had heard of the term previously, but neither
of them was familiar with its meaning (ER1, ER4). The interviewee from an energy related
NGO (NGO1) understood PEDs as synonymous with LECs, highlighting the confusion
over terminology “Our interpretation is energy communities, which we are promoting as a representative organization of people with concerns about the environment, not only that it is renewable
and clean energy-but that we are working to reduce and even completely eliminate fossil fuels . . .
but also the opportunity to democratize the energy system” (NGO1). Another interviewee from
a Cooperative (C1) believed that rather than a surplus of energy, PEDs/LECs could grow
in size to match production by incorporating more residents, and that the borders of a PED
or LEC could be malleable. This goes beyond current notions of PEDs replication [17,72],
which assume fixed boundaries, and could provide an interesting and viable means of
growing and up-scaling PEDs for the future. Once a definition of PEDs had been given,
one town councillr (P1) said: “we have no interest in becoming a PED, absolutely not, because
we do not want to have any surplus energy that goes to the supplier. What we really want to do
is make sure that our consumption is met almost completely by our own production, but no more
than that. If you are not a distributor then it really needs to be about meeting your energy needs and
nothing more.” (P1).
This seems to indicate that the low price currently given to excess energy sold to the
grid from forms of prosumership (both individual and collective) is a significant barrier
when it comes to encouraging the creation of PEDs which by their very definition are meant
to produce a surplus. This could be remedied through direct government policy. It seems
that the term PED has not fully entered into the vocabulary of experts, and there may be
good grounds for policymakers to engage in a media campaign in order to make the term
more familiar, at least in the case of Spain. Whilst LECs in Spain can be situated within
the niche currently according to the MLP, it seems that PEDs are perhaps in a pre-niche
state, where they are still yet to be formed in such a way as to enter the niche, let alone the
regime level, despite the pressure from the landscape. This may change in the near future
as the term PED may evolve according to how it is used across different EU countries.
4.2. Physical Capital and Natural Capital—The Infrastructure and Environment
Geographical and climatic conditions make solar energy be the most common renewable energy source used for the creation of PEDs in Spain. Conversely, windfarms are
often seen as contentious [55] due to acceptance issues which are sometimes portrayed
as NIMBYism [73]. However, there has been some energy justice research which suggest
that increasing citizen participation can lead to greater acceptance in places where this is
possible [74]. One LEC in Andalusia (EC1) rued the fact that in the past the community was
able to create its own hydro-energy system but water levels were no longer reliable enough
to make this possible, showing the negative impact of climate change on intergenerational
energy justice. In a town in Navarra (EC2), an old abandoned hydro-electric plant was
restored, but this was only possible because local water rights had been maintained for
irrigation purposes, allowing the use of the water. In two other cases, a UNESCO world
heritage town, and a mediaeval walled town, PV was not permitted within the center, but
according to ER1, large scale PV farms are planned in the surrounding area. As NGO1
highlighted, a just energy strategy is needed: “In Spain, there are a lot of useful materials for

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

9 of 18

renewables, however, they are opening many licenses and many prospections for open-cast mines,
and this of course destroys biodiversity, the landscape, and so on”.
In terms of distributional justice, having suitable natural capital is a prerequisite to
installing physical capital such as PV. Home-owners may be more likely to opt for becoming
individual prosumers, whilst those in rented or multi-occupancy accommodation may not
have the legal right to install PVs, increasing energy inequalities. According to P1, the town
of Soto del Real in Madrid reported that since the overturning of RD900/2015, the number
of homes installing PV in the town has increased, from 2 in 2018, to 9 in 2019, to 22 in 2020,
to over 20 in the first 3 months of 2021, meaning that RET might well be reaching the point
of becoming an established part of the regime. In order to counter existing inequalities,
multiple respondents explained that they relied on the local authorities to cede the roofspace of public buildings, such as schools (EC1), abandoned buildings (EC2), sports centers
(P1, E4). Interviewee C1 suggested making suitable private roofs (i.e., industrial estates or
office buildings) available to produce energy for those who need it the most: “I think that it
is even an obligation for all of us who live in a built environment in cities, in towns, in villages, to
make the most of the space that we already have, that is not being used to generate energy” (C1).
Some policymakers from local authorities (P1 and E4) were already engaged in this,
and encouraging such engagement could greatly reduce distributional energy injustices in
this form of physical capital. Using surplus energy generated on local authority buildings
for LECs was seen as preferable to creating a surplus instead of giving it to the grid for a
fraction of what it was sold on for (P1).
A further form of physical (and natural) capital is district heating and cooling (DH),
and three of the official Spanish PED-like cases include or center around this. DH used
to be commonplace but were replaced in a concerted campaign which one interviewee
perceived as “A real social scam in my opinion, because what is really efficient are the centralized
systems for community and for security.” (P2, Mo2). Returning to more prevalent use of DH
may reduce overall costs and reduce energy poverty, but the installation of DH in existing
districts is costly and disruptive.
The developer who set up a DH network in Mostoles, Madrid using biomass, is
currently applying for permission for a further DH which will be combined with the
creation of some form of LEC, potentially in connection with solar assisted DH [75,76], but
this once again raises issues of energy justice. How are the benefits and burdens going to
be distributed when a private firm manages it? Are there barriers to citizen participation?
How transparent are the processes connected with this? It seems clear that having a third
party assist or take control and develop LECs within a PED may make things substantially
easier for residents, but there are more questions than answers when it comes to exactly
how this is to take place. According to P2 Mo2: “It has to be someone who, for example, in this
case like (Company name), who presents them with the idea, who is willing to receive it, who has to
stay, who has to adapt it”.
Community energy storage has been researched [77] but this is in its infancy in Spain.
In the interviews none of the LECs or PEDs had made any arrangements for energy storage
due to its perceived cost and complexity. “We have ruled out storage also for simplicity” (EC3).
Resistance to the idea of energy storage seems to imply that this is a barrier for the
creation of autarchic PEDs which do not rely on energy imports at all, “In fact, you’re
going to need batteries, you’re going to need storage, in other words, you’re already entering into
a scheme that in the end, in order to buy in isolation, all this material is going to be much more
expensive.” (ER2,). However, this barrier disappears when one considers the fact that PEDs
can be autonomous, dynamic or virtual [10]. Dynamic PEDs need to produce an annual
net surplus but are also able to import energy (i.e., at night for those that rely on PV, and
virtual PEDs can take advantage of larger scale storage solutions such as the wind-pumped
hydropower station on El Hierro [78], or combine different forms of renewable energy
in order to reduce intermittency, such as hydro, wave and wind [79,80]. Furthermore,
innovative solutions to the issue of energy storage have been implemented in the PED in

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

10 of 18

Évora, Portugal, where the use of second life batteries from electric vehicles is currently
being tested [81].
Overall, it would appear, that local barriers connected to the physical and natural
capitals of PEDs and LECs are not insignificant, but their local nature might be overcome
by harnessing the ingenuity of residents to find viable solutions. From the interviews, the
ceding of public roof space presents novel opportunities for existing natural capital to be
harnessed for the creation of justice-informed PEDs.
4.3. Financial Capital: Barriers and Opportunities
The high initial costs involved in purchasing and installing the necessary technology to
create LECs and PEDs may make the involvement of multiple private and public partners
essential. One issue identified through our interviews concerning financial capital relates to
intergenerational justice: “In the end if we make this type of system, a critical mass of consumers
with the possibility of paying their electricity bill to the grid are not going to do so in the long term”
(ER2). This means that if large numbers of people create microgrids, this could lead to
underfunding of the national grid and, consequently, threaten national energy security.
On the other hand, the benefits of a decentralized energy system using LECs on national
energy security may well exceed any potential downside, i.e., PEDs could incorporate
mixed forms of energy ownership which would allow continued payments to the grid,
albeit on a reduced scale.
Although overall increases to grid costs have been considered in the literature [12],
a novel significant barrier for PEDs that include LECs is that there is no organization
nor group with any financial incentive to support their development. Although energy
cooperatives are largely supportive, there is little benefit to cooperatives in assisting in the
setting up of LECs. A member of the Som Energia cooperative (EC1) noted that some years
ago they were almost the only option for consumers who wanted renewable energy. Now,
LECs have to compete with the potential of people to become prosumers, with cooperatives,
and with renewable models from all the major existing energy providers (e.g., [82,83]),
all of which can be incorporated into PEDs albeit with differing outcomes in terms of a
just transition. However, there seems to be ample evidence that cooperatives such as Som
Energia, and NGOs such as Amigos de la Tierra, have been instrumental in supporting the
creation of LECs [84]. One interviewee went on to say “We would never have started anything
of what I’m telling you if it hadn’t been for the initial, disinterested and altruistic support, and
without anything asked for in return, from Som Energía” (EC1).
The use of a facilitator was seen as crucial for the planning of LECs [85], connecting
financial capital with human and social capitals. When it comes to PEDs, could LECs and
cooperatives be financially supported to co-create such districts?
4.4. Human and Social Capitals
The opaqueness of the energy market is perceived as a significant and deliberate
barrier, with some LECs setting up energy advice centers as a major part of their activities
(EC1, EC2, EC3) because energy bills and different tariffs are hard for consumers to understand. In terms of procedural justice, some interviewees went as far as suggesting that
false or deliberately confusing information is given by the major utility companies (NGO1).
Energy advice centers have been used to alleviate energy poverty [86] (See Section 4.5), and
having these services embedded within the local community through LECs may contribute
to their efficacy [87], particularly if the advice is given face-to-face [88].
The “...asymmetry of information” (ER2) is seen as a way of ensuring that consumers settle
for simpler contracts that may well be more expensive (EC1, EC2, EC3). Embedding energy
advice centers in PEDs may have an effect in creating energy literate prosumers who are
better able to make decisions regarding their own energy consumption. This becomes all the
more important from the 1 June 2021 in Spain, as a new energy tariff (The new electricity
tariff which starts on the 1 June in Spain will mean that consumers will pay different amounts
depending on the time of use; valley (13.49/Kwh, plain (17.95/kwh), and peak (30.12/Kwh).

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

11 of 18

However, the fixed part of electricity bills will also be reduced. [89]. It was implemented,
promoting households’ energy behavior: “The new electricity tariff has a very clear rationale, I
mean, change in behavior, rationale, and that’s why it is very problematic” (EC4). Although there
seems to be some concern that energy poverty and issues of recognitional energy justice will
increase with the new tariff, it might be possible that the electricity prices increase “ . . . may
motivate people to engage, to get together for a community energy project” (EC4).
Research has suggested that LECs may assist in overcoming indifference or uncertainty [90], and it may also be the case that current state of uncertainty and change in the
Spanish energy sector with the new pricing system acts as a catalyst for promoting PED
creation that includes community energy initiatives. However, a further significant barrier
is that there are no “turn-key” models for LECs. Creating a PED that incorporates LECs
is likely to involve a significant investment in time and effort which may simply not be
feasible for many people. In contrast, consumers can sign up for a “green” energy supply,
provided by most major suppliers, which does not involve any additional time, effort or
knowledge. This might mean that there are some intragenerational justice issues, as the
demographic that tends to be attracted to LECs may be younger people without families,
or retired people with more time on their hands (C1). When it comes to PED creation,
incorporating LECs may increase energy justice, but it is likely that a model in which
community energy initiatives are pre-established in conjunction with either cooperatives
or major energy suppliers will be simpler for the end user.
Furthermore, there is a lack of awareness on how the energy system works in Spain
and what the new laws are, with an enduring negative social effect related to the former
regressive “Sun Tax” (RD900/2015) which was widely publicized. One interviewee voiced
that “there wasn’t strong enough publicity to reverse that “(EC3), and that even though there
are now EU directives that help enshrine LECs legal position, they have encountered a
fear that government policies could be reversed from some prospective members. This
fear and lack of awareness on how the energy system works is further exacerbated by
the rapid speed of change in the current energy system. The uncertainty caused by rapid
change and confusing terminology is enhanced by a perception that the energy industry
is corrupt, with an EU survey showing that 86% of Spaniards believe corruption to be
a big problem [91] and a third believing that it has increased in 2020 [92]: “Historically
it is very, very corrupt. We have many former presidents and former ministers working on the
boards of directors of the big electricity companies when they finish in office. This means that, well,
governments directly legislate in favor of these companies” (EC4, V2). Indeed, a simple internet
search reveals multiple newspaper articles highlighting recognitional justice issues such as
a revolving door between politics and the major utility companies [93,94], as well as more
recent articles with allegation of corruption and price fixing [95,96]. One interviewee (EC1)
noted that a change in supplier had resulted in a technician knocking on their door and
threatening them the next day, and that this gave them the additional impetus that they
needed to go ahead and start to create a LEC.
There is widespread consensus on the need for greater citizen participation in the
energy sector [97], and influences on community engagement in renewable energy projects
in Spain, such as on the Island of La Graciosa [80], indicating that a pre-existing sense of
community might have an effect, as do attitudes and norms, and awareness of other similar
projects. This last point may indicate that there are tipping points that can be reached in
LEC participation once it has become sufficiently diffuse, potentially leading to change at
the regime level. Encouraging participation is no easy task: “everyone wants participation to
be established, but then, when it comes down to it, getting this participation to be real and effective
is not easy. You have to constantly encourage this participation and find actors who really want to
participate” (EC4, V1).
In one PED project near Valencia [71], participation in the early stages of the co-design
of the district involved numerous meetings, but interviewees from this project expressed
how difficult it was to encourage longer term attendance, when these meetings would be
scheduled for after work hours or at weekends, and people simply cannot be expected to

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

12 of 18

volunteer significant amounts of time on a regular basis. This is even more so for vulnerable
households who may need some assistance in participating [98]. In the later stages of cocreation, participants were asked to pay a €600 deposit towards accommodation in a district
which may take several years to be created, raising potential issues of recognitional justice
(PR1). Participation and reaching a consensus within the community on what is to be
done, by whom, how, and how the benefits are to be shared, is no easy matter. Reaching
agreement, even within a small block of flats is perceived as difficult: “if we don’t agree
on storing bikes downstairs in the (shared) entranceway, I doubt we will agree” (ER2). Existing
conflicts between neighbors over shared spaces coupled with the complexity of LEC and
PED creation may mean that some kind of neutral third party or intermediary is crucial if
they are to succeed.
There are numerous social benefits to PED creation, beyond energy, which were
mentioned in different interviews, for instance, increasing a local circular economy as
in the case of Viladecans in Catalonia which created a local currency [99], and built a
sense of community as a starting point for discussions on community mobility, community
gardening and more; “Energy is like an excuse to get in the same boat... all on the same course,
with the same objectives” (EC2). Similarly, one interviewee used the metaphor of planting
tomatoes: “It’s the metaphor we use for energy. If we plant tomatoes and we share them, why don’t
we plant energy? Because we’re going to plant kilowatts. Yes, and share it” (EC1). Increasing
a shared community beyond energy enables further distributional, recognitional and
procedural justice issues to be considered and resolved within the community. This also
opens up the possibility for restorative justice to be applied, when necessary, which may
be most visible with the use of this type of initiative to counter energy poverty.
4.5. PEDs and Energy Poverty
Energy poverty encompasses multiple energy injustices [100–102], and Spain has a
National Strategy [103] which defines energy poverty mainly as a consequence of low
incomes and energy-inefficient housing. The National Strategy uses four main indicators
to determine who falls into energy poverty, which are sourced from the European Energy
Poverty Observatory (EPOV) [104]. The National Strategy identified between 3.5 to 8.1
million people living in energy poverty in Spain in 2019, setting a target of 50% reduction
in energy poverty by 2025 [103].
Methods that have been identified and are used in Spain to deal with energy poverty
include a focus on consumer advice improvements, greater consumer protection, structural energy-efficiency measures and short-term financial assistance, such as the Social
Tariff [105]. The use of rooftop PV to alleviate energy poverty has been considered in
Spain [106], but potential community ownership of PV has not been fully addressed. Furthermore, PED projects such as “Making-city” in León, specifically target lower income
neighborhoods for establishing PEDs [107] in order to mitigate energy poverty through
energy efficiency improvements and RET.
The Social Tariff was set up in 2009 for electricity and 2018 for heating, and provides
a discount for vulnerable families of either 25% or 40% on the electricity price (but not
on fixed standing charges). This discount is available to vulnerable families directly from
eight utility companies and was given to over 1.3 million households in 2020 [108]. It also
includes extended payment periods (consumers are given four months to pay instead of
the usual two), simplified bills, and some disconnection protection. However, it does not
address the underlying causes of energy poverty, which has not decreased despite the
Social Tariff [109].
Moreover, there is no means for other organizations, outside of the eight major utility
companies, to offer the Social Tariff, which creates a powerful barrier countering the
participation of those suffering from energy poverty in LECs, cooperatives, and, potentially,
PEDs. Despite this, there is some evidence that some people who suffer from energy
poverty still prefer to be members of an energy cooperative or LEC, even if this means
that they do not receive the Social Tariff [109–111]. Nevertheless, the inclusion of energy

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

13 of 18

vulnerable households in LECs and cooperatives is likely to be severely impaired if these
are not able to offer the Social Tariff, and this will have repercussions on PEDs which
include these forms of community energy initiatives.
From our interviews, it became clear that excluding LEC initiatives from the Social
Tariff is a significant issue when it comes to the use of these to mitigate energy poverty
within PEDs, “if being part of an energy community project means you cannot access the Social
Tariff and the associated protection, that means that it’s not a very good solution for the household
in energy poverty” (EC4). Furthermore, this also puts LECs at a disadvantage compared
to similar forms of shared energy ownership which are managed by the major utility
companies. This was also raised in an interview with an energy researcher who noted that
“the issue of costs is contradictory because in the end the best offer, as happened with our neighbor, is
being given by Endesa or Repsol” (ER2).
The Social Tariff’s issue does not stop LECs from having a focus on energy poverty,
indeed, a researcher involved in the creation of LECs in Northern Spain said: “We work
from the perspective of how energy communities can help or can be a tool to solve fuel poverty”
(ER3). This was repeated throughout the interviews with a general consensus that even
without the Social Tariff, LECs can help reduce future vulnerability to energy poverty and
can also have an effect on those in energy poverty. The NGO involved in assisting in the
creation of LECs went as far as to say that they believed that when it comes to energy
poverty, LEC creation “could even be the solution” (NGO1). Similarly, ER2 said: “I see that
energy communities could be another vehicle to also solve energy poverty.”.
There is no doubt that there is an opportunity for PEDs that incorporate LECs to
become a part of a new strategy for energy poverty mitigation in Spain, replicating the
situation in other countries. However, owing to the current situation with the Social Tariff, it
is likely that utility owned energy initiatives within PEDs may be better suited at mitigating
energy poverty, and that a legislative change is needed if other energy initiatives are to be as
successful. In the case of the UK, research has been conducted on how energy poverty can
be alleviated through the use of novel business models which allow citizen participation in
the energy market beyond individual prosumer, specifically considering social housing
and multi-occupancy buildings [112]. However, this also recognizes the need for support
from third party intermediaries [113] who may be able to help arrange buy-as-you-use
arrangements, which are affordable and available to a greater part of the population.
Tackling energy poverty may create some tension with decarbonization aims, as energy
consumption can end up increasing [114]. This was reported as the case in Vildecans in
Catalonia, where energy poverty mitigation policies (including installing heating systems)
led to an increase in energy consumption despite these being combined with energyefficiency measures and full retrofitting, including façade and windows (EC4).
5. Conclusions
This work shows the potential role that PEDs that incorporate LECs could play in
decarbonizing and perhaps more significantly democratizing the energy system [115].
LECs have been embedded in EU policy, but PEDs are still very new concepts and need
to be fully embedded in national and regional policies, as there is no official national
strategy yet. There seem to be clear regional differences in Spain which may reflect political
differences, as well as urban-rural differences, which may be exacerbated as urban areas
are growing rapidly [116].
PEDs could contribute to a just transition in Spain, but there are significant barriers,
such as energy illiteracy, and a lack of trust and awareness, which need to be overcome
in order for this to be the case. The main strategies that this work proposes to address
existing barriers are: Firstly, there may be good grounds for policymakers to engage in
a media campaign in order to make the term more familiar to the general population.
Secondly, although available technology is enough for considerable gains to be made
in decarbonization through PED creation, the added benefits, such as energy poverty
reduction, make these interesting propositions to be considered in tandem with the creation

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

14 of 18

of larger scale RET farms. Finally, note that to truly harness the energy poverty mitigating
benefits of PEDs and LECs, legislative changes may need to occur. In this respect, the
current Social Tariff limits the inclusion of those most vulnerable in community initiatives
of this type, thus, allowing LECs, PEDs and cooperatives to offer this could greatly increase
their social impact. There may be a need to consider a move of energy poverty mitigation
from social policy to energy policy [117], where incorporating LECs and PEDs into the
arsenal of mitigation tools makes most sense, as the opportunity for synergies [118] between
energy poverty mitigation and climate change mitigation can be better taken advantage of.
In conclusion, policymaker engagement in PED creation is crucial if these are to be
successfully implemented. There is a clear opportunity to explore the use of LEC initiatives
in tandem with PED creation, leading to multiple benefits in the future.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.X.H. and R.C.-R.; Methodology, A.X.H. and R.C.-R.;
Formal Analysis, A.X.H.; Investigation, A.X.H.; Data Curation, A.X.H.; Writing—Original Draft
Preparation, A.X.H.; Writing—Review & Editing, A.X.H. and R.C.-R.; Visualization, A.X.H. and R.C.R.; Supervision, R.C.-R. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions, Innovative Training Networks, Grant
Agreement No 812730. Authors acknowledge the support for this work provided by the EPIU–Energy
poverty intelligence unit (Funded by UE-European Regional Development Fund, UIA04-212 (EPIU).
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki, and approved by the SMART-BEEjS Ethical Advisory Board, Application
number: Smart-BEEjS-Basel-18032021, Approved 27 April 2021.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study will be openly available as anonymized
transcripts in a repository, after the initial scientific article is accepted for publication, in the social
sciences studies portal for Switzerland, (https://forsbase.unil.ch/ accessed on 30 June 2021, ref.
study 14089).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

Gallego-Castillo, C.; Heleno, M.; Victoria, M. Self-Consumption for Energy Communities in Spain: A Regional Analysis under
the New Legal Framework. Energy Policy 2021, 150, 112144. [CrossRef]
Girard, A.; Gago, E.J.; Ordoñez, J.; Muneer, T. Spain’s Energy Outlook: A Review of PV Potential and Energy Export. Renew.
Energy 2016, 86, 703–715. [CrossRef]
Civiero, P.; Pascual, J.; Arcas Abella, J.; Bilbao Figuero, A.; Salom, J. PEDRERA. Positive Energy District Renovation Model for
Large Scale Actions. Energies 2021, 14, 2833. [CrossRef]
Bossi, S.; Gollner, C.; Theierling, S. Towards 100 Positive Energy Districts in Europe: Preliminary Data Analysis of 61 European
Cases. Energies 2020, 13, 6083. [CrossRef]
SETIS. SET Plan Information System. Setplan_Smartcities_Implementationplan.Pdf. Available online: https://setis.ec.europa.eu/
index_en (accessed on 20 June 2021).
EXCESS. PEB Case Studies. Available online: https://positive-energy-buildings.eu/peb-case-studies (accessed on 16 March
2021).
Villa-Arrieta, M.; Sumper, A. Economic Evaluation of Nearly Zero Energy Cities. Appl. Energy 2019, 237, 404–416. [CrossRef]
Gollner, C. Europe towards Positive Energy Districts. 182. Urban Europe. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/wpcontent/uploads/2020/06/PED-Booklet-Update-Feb-2020_2.pdf (accessed on 20 June 2021).
Bilbao. ATELIER. Available online: https://smartcity-atelier.eu/about/lighthouse-cities/bilbao/?cn-reloaded=1 (accessed on 13
July 2021).
Lindholm, O.; Rehman, H.u.; Reda, F. Positioning Positive Energy Districts in European Cities. Buildings 2021, 11, 19. [CrossRef]
Directive (EU) 2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the Promotion of the Use of
Energy from Renewable Sources (Recast). EUR-Lex. Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/LSU/?uri=
uriserv:OJ.L_.2018.328.01.0082.01.ENG (accessed on 22 April 2021).
Inês, C.; Guilherme, P.L.; Esther, M.-G.; Swantje, G.; Stephen, H.; Lars, H. Regulatory Challenges and Opportunities for Collective
Renewable Energy Prosumers in the EU. Energy Policy 2020, 138, 111212. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.

15 of 18

Capellán-Pérez, I.; Campos-Celador, Á.; Terés-Zubiaga, J. Renewable Energy Cooperatives as an Instrument towards the Energy
Transition in Spain. Energy Policy 2018, 123, 215–229. [CrossRef]
Roberts, J.; Frieden, D.; d’Herbemont, S. Energy Community Definitions. 13. Available online: https://www.compile-project.eu/
wp-content/uploads/Explanatory-note-on-energy-community-definitions.pdf (accessed on 20 June 2021).
Sokołowski, M.M. Renewable and Citizen Energy Communities in the European Union: How (Not) to Regulate Community
Energy in National Laws and Policies. J. Energy Nat. Resour. Law 2020, 38, 289–304. [CrossRef]
Hedman, Å.; Rehman, H.U.; Gabaldón, A.; Bisello, A.; Albert-Seifried, V.; Zhang, X.; Guarino, F.; Grynning, S.; Eicker, U.;
Neumann, H.-M.; et al. IEA EBC Annex83 Positive Energy Districts. Buildings 2021, 11, 130. [CrossRef]
Gabaldón Moreno, A.; Vélez, F.; Alpagut, B.; Hernández, P.; Sanz Montalvillo, C. How to Achieve Positive Energy Districts for
Sustainable Cities: A Proposed Calculation Methodology. Sustainability 2021, 13, 710. [CrossRef]
Horstink, L.; Wittmayer, J.M.; Ng, K. Pluralising the European Energy Landscape: Collective Renewable Energy Prosumers and
the EU’s Clean Energy Vision. Energy Policy 2021, 153, 112262. [CrossRef]
user_administrator. Clean Energy for All Europeans Package. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/topics/energystrategy/clean-energy-all-europeans_en (accessed on 11 March 2021).
Koirala, B.P.; van Oost, E.C.; van der Waal, E.C.; van der Windt, H.J. New Pathways for Community Energy and Storage; Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute: Basel, Switzerland, 2021.
de Mier Cortijo, L.G.; Lopez, M.L.; Castaño-Rosa, R.; Hearn, A. Consulta Pública Previa Comunidades Energéticas Locales.
Available online: https://hogaressaludables.getafe.es/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Consulta-publica-Comunidades-Energ%
C3%A9ticas.pdf (accessed on 20 June 2021).
El MITECO Abre el Proceso de Consulta Pública Previa Para el Desarrollo de Comunidades Energéticas Locales. Available
online: https://www.miteco.gob.es/es/prensa/ultimas-noticias/el-miteco-abre-el-proceso-de-consulta-p%C3%BAblica-previapara-el-desarrollo-de-comunidades-energ%C3%A9ticas-locales-/tcm:30-516684 (accessed on 28 June 2021).
Garriga, S.M.; Dabbagh, M.; Krarti, M. Optimal Carbon-Neutral Retrofit of Residential Communities in Barcelona, Spain. Energy
Build. 2020, 208, 109651. [CrossRef]
Wiersma, B.; Devine-Wright, P. Decentralising Energy: Comparing the Drivers and Influencers of Projects Led by Public, Private,
Community and Third Sector Actors. Contemp. Soc. Sci. 2014, 9, 456–470. [CrossRef]
Torabi Moghadam, S.; Di Nicoli, M.V.; Manzo, S.; Lombardi, P. Mainstreaming Energy Communities in the Transition to a
Low-Carbon Future: A Methodological Approach. Energies 2020, 13, 1597. [CrossRef]
Rodríguez, A.S. Potenciales de La Energía Distribuida En España; Revista de Obras Públicas: Organo Profesional de los Ingenieros
de Caminos, Canales y Puertos: Madrid, Spain, 2017; pp. 8–19.
Gjorgievski, V.Z.; Cundeva, S.; Georghiou, G.E. Social Arrangements, Technical Designs and Impacts of Energy Communities: A
Review. Renew. Energy 2021, 169, 1138–1156. [CrossRef]
Caramizaru, A.; Uihlein, A. Energy Communities: An Overview of Energy and Social Innovation; Publications Office of the European
Union: Luxembourg, 2020.
Castaño-Rosa, R.; Solís-Guzmán, J.; Marrero, M. Energy Poverty Goes South? Understanding the Costs of Energy Poverty with
the Index of Vulnerable Homes in Spain. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2020, 60, 101325. [CrossRef]
Thomson, H.; Bouzarovski, S.; Snell, C. Rethinking the Measurement of Energy Poverty in Europe: A Critical Analysis of
Indicators and Data. Indoor Built Environ. 2017, 26, 879–901. [CrossRef]
Savelli, I.; Morstyn, T. Better Together: Harnessing Social Relationships in Smart Energy Communities. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2021,
78, 102125. [CrossRef]
Hanke, F.; Lowitzsch, J. Empowering Vulnerable Consumers to Join Renewable Energy Communities—Towards an Inclusive
Design of the Clean Energy Package. Energies 2020, 13, 1615. [CrossRef]
Lee, J.; Kim, H.; Byrne, J. Operationalising Capability Thinking in the Assessment of Energy Poverty Relief Policies: Moving from
Compensation-Based to Empowerment-Focused Policy Strategies. J. Hum. Dev. Capab. 2021, 22, 292–315. [CrossRef]
Douvitsa, I. The new law on energy communities in Greece. Coop. Econ. Soc. 2018, 40, 31–58. [CrossRef]
García, G.F.; Frantzeskaki, M. Las comunidades energéticas en Grecia. REVESCO Rev. Estud. Coop. 2021, 137, 57–72.
Barroco Fontes Cunha, F.; Carani, C.; Nucci, C.A.; Castro, C.; Santana Silva, M.; Andrade Torres, E. Transitioning to a Low Carbon
Society through Energy Communities: Lessons Learned from Brazil and Italy. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2021, 75, 101994. [CrossRef]
Algarvio, H. The Role of Local Citizen Energy Communities in the Road to Carbon-Neutral Power Systems: Outcomes from a
Case Study in Portugal. Smart Cities 2021, 4, 840–863. [CrossRef]
Koirala, B.P.; Koliou, E.; Friege, J.; Hakvoort, R.A.; Herder, P.M. Energetic Communities for Community Energy: A Review of Key
Issues and Trends Shaping Integrated Community Energy Systems. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2016, 56, 722–744. [CrossRef]
Gouveia, J.P.; Seixas, J.; Palma, P.; Duarte, H.; Luz, H.; Cavadini, G.B. Positive Energy District: A Model for Historic Districts to
Address Energy Poverty. Front. Sustain. Cities 2021, 3, 16. [CrossRef]
Ajanovic, A.; Hiesl, A.; Haas, R. On the Role of Storage for Electricity in Smart Energy Systems. Energy 2020, 200, 117473.
[CrossRef]
Østergaard, P.A.; Johannsen, R.M.; Lund, H.; Mathiesen, B.V. Latest Developments in 4th Generation District Heating and Smart
Energy Systems. Int. J. Sustain. Energy Plan. Manag. 2021, 31, 1–4.

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

42.
43.
44.
45.

46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.

57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.

70.

16 of 18

Ahmad, T.; Zhang, D. Using the Internet of Things in Smart Energy Systems and Networks. Sustain. Cities Soc. 2021, 68, 102783.
[CrossRef]
López Prol, J.; Steininger, K.W. Photovoltaic Self-Consumption Is Now Profitable in Spain: Effects of the New Regulation on
Prosumers’ Internal Rate of Return. Energy Policy 2020, 146, 111793. [CrossRef]
Som Energia|La Cooperativa d’Energia Verda. Available online: https://www.somenergia.coop/ca/ (accessed on 29 March
2021).
Cuesta-Fernandez, I.; Belda-Miquel, S.; Calabuig Tormo, C. Challengers in Energy Transitions beyond Renewable Energy
Cooperatives: Community-Owned Electricity Distribution Cooperatives in Spain. Innov. Eur. J. Soc. Sci. Res. 2020, 33, 140–159.
[CrossRef]
Kunze, C.; Becker, S. Collective Ownership in Renewable Energy and Opportunities for Sustainable Degrowth. Sustain. Sci. 2015,
10, 425–437. [CrossRef]
Pinker, A.; Argüelles, L.; Fischer, A.; Becker, S. Between Straitjacket and Possibility: Energy Initiatives and the Politics of
Regulation. Geoforum 2020, 113, 14–25. [CrossRef]
Day, R.; Walker, G.; Simcock, N. Conceptualising Energy Use and Energy Poverty Using a Capabilities Framework. Energy Policy
2016, 93, 255–264. [CrossRef]
Lieu, J.; Sorman, A.H.; Johnson, O.W.; Virla, L.D.; Resurrección, B.P. Three Sides to Every Story: Gender Perspectives in Energy
Transition Pathways in Canada, Kenya and Spain. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2020, 68, 101550. [CrossRef]
Geels, F.W. Technological Transitions as Evolutionary Reconfiguration Processes: A Multi-Level Perspective and a Case-Study.
Res. Policy 2002, 31, 1257–1274. [CrossRef]
Jenkins, K.; Sovacool, B.K.; McCauley, D. Humanizing Sociotechnical Transitions through Energy Justice: An Ethical Framework
for Global Transformative Change. Energy Policy 2018, 117, 66–74. [CrossRef]
Dóci, G.; Vasileiadou, E.; Petersen, A.C. Exploring the Transition Potential of Renewable Energy Communities. Futures 2015, 66,
85–95. [CrossRef]
Sen, A. Commodities and Capabilities; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 1999.
Arnaiz, M.; Cochrane, T.A.; Hastie, R.; Bellen, C. Micro-Hydropower Impact on Communities’ Livelihood Analysed with the
Capability Approach. Energy Sustain. Dev. 2018, 45, 206–210. [CrossRef]
Velasco-Herrejon, P.; Bauwens, T. Energy Justice from the Bottom up: A Capability Approach to Community Acceptance of Wind
Energy in Mexico. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2020, 70, 101711. [CrossRef]
Fernández-Baldor, Á.; Boni, A.; Lillo, P.; Hueso, A. Are Technological Projects Reducing Social Inequalities and Improving
People’s Well-Being? A Capability Approach Analysis of Renewable Energy-Based Electrification Projects in Cajamarca, Peru. J.
Hum. Dev. Capab. 2014, 15, 13–27. [CrossRef]
A European Green Deal. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en
(accessed on 18 June 2021).
Jenkins, K.; McCauley, D.; Heffron, R.; Stephan, H.; Rehner, R. Energy Justice: A Conceptual Review. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2016, 11,
174–182. [CrossRef]
Hearn, A.X.; Sohre, A.; Burger, P. Innovative but Unjust? Analysing the Opportunities and Justice Issues within Positive Energy
Districts in Europe. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2021, 78, 102127. [CrossRef]
McCauley, D.; Ramasar, V.; Heffron, R.J.; Sovacool, B.K.; Mebratu, D.; Mundaca, L. Energy Justice in the Transition to Low Carbon
Energy Systems: Exploring Key Themes in Interdisciplinary Research. Appl. Energy 2019, 233–234, 916–921. [CrossRef]
Mulvaney, D. Opening the Black Box of Solar Energy Technologies: Exploring Tensions Between Innovation and Environmental
Justice. Sci. Cult. 2013, 22, 230–237. [CrossRef]
Guia_Para-Desarrollo-Instrumentos-Fomento_Comunidades_Energeticas_Locales_20032019_0.Pdf. Mapeo Normativa Energetica. Available online: https://www.scribd.com/ (accessed on 20 June 2021).
Atutxa, E.; Zubero, I.; Calvo-Sotomayor, I. Scalability of Low Carbon Energy Communities in Spain: An Empiric Approach from
the Renewed Commons Paradigm. Energies 2020, 13, 5045. [CrossRef]
Axon, S.; Morrissey, J.; Aiesha, R.; Hillman, J.; Revez, A.; Lennon, B.; Salel, M.; Dunphy, N.; Boo, E. The Human Factor:
Classification of European Community-Based Behaviour Change Initiatives. J. Clean. Prod. 2018, 182, 567–586. [CrossRef]
Balbás Egea, J.Á.; Eguren Egiguren, J.A. Bases for a Sustainable Energy Model. Case Study: Basque Autonomous Community. Int.
J. Sustain. Energy 2019, 38, 884–903. [CrossRef]
Romero-Rubio, C.; de Andrés Díaz, J.R. Sustainable Energy Communities: A Study Contrasting Spain and Germany. Energy
Policy 2015, 85, 397–409. [CrossRef]
Schram, W.; Louwen, A.; Lampropoulos, I.; van Sark, W. Comparison of the Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Potential of
Energy Communities. Energies 2019, 12, 4440. [CrossRef]
Cabarcos, A.L.; Castro, N.R.; Viña, V.M. Autonomía Enerxética Local e Desenvolvemento Rural Sustentable: Análise Da
Predisposición a Participar En Comunidades Enerxéticas Renovables. Rev. Galega Econ. 2020, 29, 141–166.
Lizana, J.; Manteigas, V.; Chacartegui, R.; Lage, J.; Becerra, J.A.; Blondeau, P.; Rato, R.; Silva, F.; Gamarra, A.R.; Herrera, I. A
Methodology to Empower Citizens towards a Low-Carbon Economy. The Potential of Schools and Sustainability Indicators. J.
Environ. Manag. 2021, 284, 112043. [CrossRef]
Camprubí, L. Whose Self-Sufficiency? Energy Dependency in Spain from 1939. Energy Policy 2019, 125, 227–234. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

71.
72.
73.
74.
75.

76.

77.

78.
79.
80.

81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.

89.

90.
91.

92.
93.
94.
95.

96.
97.

17 of 18

Vivir Aquí. La Pinada. Available online: https://www.barriolapinada.es/vivir-aqui/ (accessed on 20 June 2021).
Alpagut, B.; Akyürek, Ö.; Mitre, E.M. Positive Energy Districts Methodology and Its Replication Potential. Proceedings 2019, 20, 8.
[CrossRef]
Leiren, M.D.; Aakre, S.; Linnerud, K.; Julsrud, T.E.; Di Nucci, M.-R.; Krug, M. Community Acceptance of Wind Energy
Developments: Experience from Wind Energy Scarce Regions in Europe. Sustainability 2020, 12, 1754. [CrossRef]
Avila, S. Environmental Justice and the Expanding Geography of Wind Power Conflicts. Sustain. Sci. 2018, 13, 599–616. [CrossRef]
Abokersh, M.H.; Vallès, M.; Cabeza, L.F.; Boer, D. A Framework for the Optimal Integration of Solar Assisted District Heating in
Different Urban Sized Communities: A Robust Machine Learning Approach Incorporating Global Sensitivity Analysis. Appl.
Energy 2020, 267, 114903. [CrossRef]
Tulus, V.; Abokersh, M.H.; Cabeza, L.F.; Vallès, M.; Jiménez, L.; Boer, D. Economic and Environmental Potential for Solar Assisted
Central Heating Plants in the EU Residential Sector: Contribution to the 2030 Climate and Energy EU Agenda. Appl. Energy 2019,
236, 318–339. [CrossRef]
Parra, D.; Swierczynski, M.; Stroe, D.I.; Norman, S.A.; Abdon, A.; Worlitschek, J.; O’Doherty, T.; Rodrigues, L.; Gillott, M.; Zhang,
X.; et al. An Interdisciplinary Review of Energy Storage for Communities: Challenges and Perspectives. Renew. Sustain. Energy
Rev. 2017, 79, 730–749. [CrossRef]
Gorona Del Viento. Gorona Del Viento El Hierro, S.A. Available online: https://www.goronadelviento.es/ (accessed on 18 June
2021).
Robertson, B.; Bekker, J.; Buckham, B. Renewable Integration for Remote Communities: Comparative Allowable Cost Analyses
for Hydro, Solar and Wave Energy. Appl. Energy 2020, 264, 114677. [CrossRef]
Jelić, M.; Batić, M.; Tomašević, N.; Barney, A.; Polatidis, H.; Crosbie, T.; Abi Ghanem, D.; Short, M.; Pillai, G. Towards SelfSustainable Island Grids through Optimal Utilization of Renewable Energy Potential and Community Engagement. Energies
2020, 13, 3386. [CrossRef]
A Second Life for Batteries. POCITYF. Available online: https://pocityf.eu/news/a-second-life-for-batteries/ (accessed on 7 July
2021).
Nuestro Compromiso. Endesa. Available online: https://www.endesa.com/es/nuestro-compromiso (accessed on 27 May 2021).
Sustainability. Available online: https://www.iberdrola.com/sustainability (accessed on 27 May 2021).
Amigos de la Tierra. Comunidades Energéticas. Available online: https://www.tierra.org/comunidades-energeticas/ (accessed on
20 June 2021).
Hettinga, S.; Nijkamp, P.; Scholten, H. A Multi-Stakeholder Decision Support System for Local Neighbourhood Energy Planning.
Energy Policy 2018, 116, 277–288. [CrossRef]
Martiskainen, M.; Heiskanen, E.; Speciale, G. Community Energy Initiatives to Alleviate Fuel Poverty: The Material Politics of
Energy Cafés. Local Environ. 2018, 23, 20–35. [CrossRef]
Reeves, A. Exploring Local and Community Capacity to Reduce Fuel Poverty: The Case of Home Energy Advice Visits in the UK.
Energies 2016, 9, 276. [CrossRef]
Baker, K.J.; Mould, R.; Stewart, F.; Restrick, S.; Melone, H.; Atterson, B. Never Try and Face the Journey Alone: Exploring
the Face-to-Face Advocacy Needs of Fuel Poor Householders in the United Kingdom. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2019, 51, 210–219.
[CrossRef]
Así es la Nueva Tarifa de la Luz: Cuándo es Más Barata y Trucos Para Ahorrar en la Factura. Available online: https:
//www.antena3.com/noticias/sociedad/cambio-tarifas-electricas-pagare-mas-cual-mejor-hora-usar-electrodomesticos_2021
053160b5b8c175307d0001ad95ed.html (accessed on 23 June 2021).
Bauwens, T.; Devine-Wright, P. Positive Energies? An Empirical Study of Community Energy Participation and Attitudes to
Renewable Energy. Energy Policy 2018, 118, 612–625. [CrossRef]
El 86 % de los Españoles ve la Corrupción Como un “Gran Problema”, Según TI. Available online: https://www.swissinfo.ch/
spa/corrupci%C3%B3n-espa%C3%B1a--previsi%C3%B3n-_el-86---de-los-espa%C3%B1oles-ve-la-corrupci%C3%B3n-comoun--gran-problema---seg%C3%BAn-ti/46705952 (accessed on 17 June 2021).
Global Corruption Barometer EU: People Worried about Unchecked Abuse of Power. Available online: https://www.transparency.
org/en/news/gcb-eu-2021-survey-people-worry-corruption-unchecked-impunity-business-politics (accessed on 17 June 2021).
Dirigentes, G. Puertas Giratorias: Más de 50 Políticos Enchufados a la Energía. Available online: https://dirigentesdigital.com/
hemeroteca/puertas_giratorias_mas_de_50_politicos_enchufados_a_la_energia-AVDD12013 (accessed on 17 June 2021).
43 Políticos “Enchufados” En Eléctricas. Crónica. EL MUNDO. Available online: https://www.elmundo.es/cronica/2014/02/23
/530881d922601da2168b456c.html (accessed on 17 June 2021).
Herrera, E. Catorce ex Cargos Políticos se Sientan en los Consejos de Grandes Empresas Energéticas. Available online: https:
//www.infolibre.es/noticias/politica/2018/08/28/expoliticos_empresas_sector_electrico_86148_1012.html (accessed on 17 June
2021).
El Gobierno Pide a Competencia Que Investigue a Las Eléctricas Por Una Posible Manipulación de Precios. Economía. Cadena
SER. Available online: https://cadenaser.com/ser/2021/06/07/economia/1623088773_133664.html (accessed on 21 June 2021).
Koirala, B.P.; Araghi, Y.; Kroesen, M.; Ghorbani, A.; Hakvoort, R.A.; Herder, P.M. Trust, Awareness, and Independence: Insights
from a Socio-Psychological Factor Analysis of Citizen Knowledge and Participation in Community Energy Systems. Energy Res.
Soc. Sci. 2018, 38, 33–40. [CrossRef]

Sustainability 2021, 13, 8698

98.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.

107.
108.
109.
110.
111.
112.
113.

114.
115.
116.
117.
118.

18 of 18

Southwell, B.; Ronneberg, K.; Shen, K.; Jorgens, E.; Hazel, J.; Alemu, R.; Ross, J.; Richman, L.; Vermeer, D. Energy Information
Engagement among the Poor: Predicting Participation in a Free Workshop. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2014, 4, 21–22. [CrossRef]
Sánchez-Bayón, A.; García-Ramos, M.Á. How to Undertake with Digital Currencies as Csr 3.0 Practices in Wellbeing Economics?
J. Entrep. Educ. 2020, 23, 1–8.
Medios de Comunicación y Stakeholders: Contribución al Debate Público de La Pobreza y Justicia Energética En España/Media
and Stakeholders: Contribution to the Public Debate on Poverty and Energy Justice in Spain. REIS 2019, 168, 73–92. [CrossRef]
Groves, C.; Shirani, F.; Pidgeon, N.; Cherry, C.; Thomas, G.; Roberts, E.; Henwood, K. ‘The Bills Are a Brick Wall’: Narratives of
Energy Vulnerability, Poverty and Adaptation in South Wales. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 2020, 70, 101777. [CrossRef]
Walker, G.; Day, R. Fuel Poverty as Injustice: Integrating Distribution, Recognition and Procedure in the Struggle for Affordable
Warmth. Energy Policy 2012, 49, 69–75. [CrossRef]
Spanish National Strategy for Energy Poverty Miteco.gob.es. Available online: https://www.miteco.gob.es/es/ministerio/
planes-estrategias/estrategia-pobreza-energetica/ (accessed on 20 June 2021).
EU Energy Poverty Observatory. Available online: https://www.energypoverty.eu/eu-energy-poverty-observatory (accessed on
15 June 2021).
Bono Social de Electricidad. Available online: https://www.bonosocial.gob.es/#quees (accessed on 16 June 2021).
Romero Rodríguez, L.; Sánchez Ramos, J.; Guerrero Delgado, M.; Molina Félix, J.L.; Álvarez Domínguez, S. Mitigating Energy
Poverty: Potential Contributions of Combining PV and Building Thermal Mass Storage in Low-Income Households. Energy
Convers. Manag. 2018, 173, 65–80. [CrossRef]
City Profiles–Making City. Available online: http://makingcity.eu/city-profiles/ (accessed on 18 July 2021).
Bono Social Eléctrico: ¿cómo le Afecta la Nueva Factura de la luz y las Franjas Horarias? Available online: https://as.com/
diarioas/2021/06/03/actualidad/1622724404_875070.html (accessed on 16 June 2021).
Alvarez, G.G.; Tol, R.S.J. The Impact of the Bono Social de Electricidad on Energy Poverty in Spain; Working Paper Series; Department
of Economics, University of Sussex Business School: Brighton, UK, 2020.
Gabiola, E.J.; Gázquez, J.D.P.; Rodríguez, J.A.S. El Bono Social y Las Cooperativas Energéticas Verdes: Situación y Perspectivas.
Revesco. Rev. Estud. Coop. 2016, 122, 165–190. [CrossRef]
Antepara, I.; Claeyé, F.; Lopez, A.; Robyns, B. Fighting against Fuel Poverty by Collaborating with Social Services through Energy
Advice: An Innovative Case from Spain. Rev. Vasca Econ. Soc. 2020, 17, 71–96. [CrossRef]
Pitt, J.; Nolden, C. Post-Subsidy Solar PV Business Models to Tackle Fuel Poverty in Multi-Occupancy Social Housing. Energies
2020, 13, 4852. [CrossRef]
Saunders, R.W.; Gross, R.J.K.; Wade, J. Can Premium Tariffs for Micro-Generation and Small Scale Renewable Heat Help the Fuel
Poor, and If so, How? Case Studies of Innovative Finance for Community Energy Schemes in the UK. Energy Policy 2012, 42,
78–88. [CrossRef]
Chakravarty, S.; Tavoni, M. Energy Poverty Alleviation and Climate Change Mitigation: Is There a Trade Off? Energy Econ. 2013,
40, S67–S73. [CrossRef]
Saintier, S. Community Energy Companies in the UK: A Potential Model for Sustainable Development in “Local” Energy?
Sustainability 2017, 9, 1325. [CrossRef]
Boeri, A.; Longo, D.; Roversi, R.; Turci, G. Positive Energy Districts: European Research And Pilot Projects Focus on the
Mediterranean Area. Sustain. Mediterr. Constr. 2020, 12, 22–27.
Primc, K.; Slabe-Erker, R. Social Policy or Energy Policy? Time to Reconsider Energy Poverty Policies. Energy Sustain. Dev. 2020,
55, 32–36. [CrossRef]
López, A.N. A Rolex o a setas. Comunidades Autónomas, cambio climático y modelo económico. Rev. Catalana Dret Ambient.
2020, 11, 1–30.

