energies
Article

Towards 100 Positive Energy Districts in Europe:
Preliminary Data Analysis of 61 European Cases
Silvia Bossi 1, * , Christoph Gollner 2 and Sarah Theierling 2
1
2

*

Italian National Agency for Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development, ENEA,
CR Casaccia, 00123 Rome, Italy
Austrian Research Promotion Agency, FFG, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Christoph.Gollner@ffg.at (C.G.);
sarah.theierling@ffg.at (S.T.)
Correspondence: silvia.bossi@enea.it

Received: 12 October 2020; Accepted: 16 November 2020; Published: 20 November 2020




Abstract: Positive Energy Districts and Neighborhoods (PEDs) are seen as a promising pathway
towards sustainable urban areas. Several cities have already taken up such PED-related developments.
To support such approaches, European countries joined forces to achieve 100 PEDs until 2025 through
a comprehensive research and innovation program. A solid understanding and consideration of
cities’ strategies, experiences and project features serve as the basis for developing and designing the
PED program. JPI Urban Europe has been collecting information on projects towards sustainable
urbanization and the energy transition across Europe. The collected cases are summarized in a PED
Booklet whose update was recently published on the JPI Urban Europe website. Results presented in
this paper provide insights from the analysis of 61 projects in Europe and offer recommendations for
future PED developments.
Keywords: Positive Energy District (PED); PED Booklet; SET-Plan

1. Introduction
Cities have a strong impact on greenhouse gas production and climate change, and several
programs and initiatives are focused on new strategies to transform cities into climate neutral ones [1,2].
The Strategic Energy Technology (SET) Plan, adopted by the European Union in 2008 to establish
an energy technology strategy in that region, is focused on 10 key action fields, of which Action
3.2 aims to support the planning, deployment and replication of 100 Positive Energy Districts by 2025
for sustainable urbanization [3].
The Program on Positive Energy Districts and Neighborhoods (PED Program) is conducted by
JPI Urban Europe in cooperation with the SET Plan Action 3.2, and it involves stakeholders from
city administrations, urban planning, industry, research, and civic society organizations [4]. This is
seen as an important contribution to current policies on achieving the goals of reducing Europe’s
carbon footprint, managing the energy transition, and cities’ ambitions towards sustainable urban
development. A solid understanding and consideration of cities’ experiences and strategies serves as
the base of developing the program. This is why the PED program aims at a strong involvement of all
stakeholder groups in the program’s implementation.
A framework for PED has been defined as follows: “Positive Energy Districts are energy-efficient
and energy-flexible urban areas or groups of connected buildings which produce net zero greenhouse
gas emissions and actively manage an annual local or regional surplus production of renewable
energy. They require integration of different systems and infrastructures and interaction between
buildings, the users and the regional energy, mobility and ICT systems, while securing the energy
supply and a good life for all in line with social, economic and environmental sustainability” [5].
Energies 2020, 13, 6083; doi:10.3390/en13226083

www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

Energies 2020, 13, 6083

2 of 13

The primary energy is the performance indicator of the PED definition and the balance includes both
building operations and user-related energy consumptions. Participating PED program partners
have agreed that this PED reference framework offers a common baseline across all countries while
ensuring flexibility regarding local conditions for PEDs at the same time. Consequently, guidelines for
identifying geographical and virtual boundaries of PEDs are still under discussion in collaboration with
other programs (i.e., EERA Joint Program Smart Cities) with the ambition of making PEDs achievable
for wide range of possible approaches. Examples of PED projects are already under development in
Europe in connection with research activities [6–8].
A PED Program mapping of urban projects dealing with the energy transition and sustainability
aims to provide an overview of projects, approaches and strategies towards Positive Energy Districts.
A compilation of these current cases serves as a basis for knowledge exchange and identification of
good practice. The collected cases are summarized in a PED Booklet, an update of which was recently
published on the JPI Urban Europe website [9].
Of the 61 cases described in the Booklet, 29 declared a PED ambition. This paper analyses data
collected in the PED Booklet to identify common features, strategies, challenges, and success factors of
PED projects to guide stakeholders in this field.
For this analysis it must be considered that not all countries have equally contributed to the
Booklet yet. The Booklet is based on voluntary contributions from individual PED-related projects and
will be continuously updated. Therefore, the results do not allow any interpretation about the level of
PED efforts across Europe in general yet.
2. Materials and Methods
For this study, the 61 cases described in the PED Booklet (later referred to as Booklet) were
considered and analyzed. Project descriptions were collected using a template that was sent out to
reference persons of each project. The template was organized into 4 sections:
•

•
•

•

General information: this section included information about geographical position, contacts,
size, building structure, land use, and financing. Some of these questions allowed multiple
choice answers.
Overview description of the project: this section provided with a text description with the
possibility to add further project information and illustrations.
Strategies: this part included multiple choice questions about goals/ambitions, expected impact,
overall strategy of city municipality, factors included in implementation strategies, stakeholder
involvement strategies, and typology of energy supply.
Success factors, challenges, and barriers: text descriptions were collected on key learnings
regarding supportive and inhibiting factors in the PED implementation process.

The first question in the “Strategies” section of the template was on goals and ambitions. Among the
multiple choices, there was the option “Positive Energy”. The cases were divided in two categories:
projects that declared a PED ambition (PED, NP = 29) versus projects that did not declare a PED
ambition but presented interesting features for the PED Program (Towards (To)-PED, NTP = 32).
The data were collected in an Excel file table and analyzed separately for PED and To-PED.
Only features with less than 30% of n/a data were selected as reliable and worthy to be analyzed:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Geographic distribution
Implementation status
Building structure
Land use
Energy typology
Success factors, challenges, and barriers

Energies 2020, 13, 6083

3 of 13

3. Results
3.1. Geographic Distribution of PED and Towards PED Projects
The Booklet includes 61 cases in 19 different countries in Europe (Table 1). Of the 61 projects,
29 projects, located in 13 European countries, declared a PED ambition while the rest of the projects
(To-PED) are located in 14 European countries.
Table 1. Geographic distribution of projects.
Country

Norway
Finland
Sweden
The Netherlands
Italy
Germany
Denmark
Austria
France
Spain
Switzerland
Romania
Estonia
Ireland
Belgium
Greece
Hungary
Turkey
Portugal
TOT

PED

To-PED

TOT

8
4
1
3
3
0
0
2
1
2
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
29

1
3
5
3
5
4
2
2
1
2
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
32

9
7
6
6
8
4
2
4
2
4
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
61

The highest number of projects of the Booklet (PED + To-PED) are located in Norway (9), Italy (8),
Finland (7), Sweden (6), and The Netherlands (6).
In terms of PED projects, Norway contributed the most cases (8). On the contrary, only two
PED/To-PED projects are located in Eastern and Southeastern Europe.
This geographical imbalance may be explained mainly with either of two factors: (1) policy
priorities and implementation status of policies towards the energy transition vary between
European countries; therefore, specific national programs on PEDs or PED-related matters have
only been implemented in some countries. An example is represented by the ZEN Research Centre
(https://fmezen.no/about-us/); nine pilot projects were spread over Norway with the aim of developing
zero emission neighborhoods [10–12]. ZEN has public and industrial partners to guarantee a
multidisciplinary approach that combines together researchers with building professionals, property
developers, public authorities, energy companies, building owners, and users. (2) High support of
national delegates for the PED Program in collecting information on PED projects in their countries.
3.2. Implementation Status
The template distributed to projects’ representatives included a question related to the
implementation status of their projects. Possible choices were: “Planned”, “Implementation Stage”,
“Realized”, “In Operation”, and “n/a”. Percentages of PED and Towards PED projects in different
implementation phases are summarized in Figure 1. Most of PED projects (green) are in their
implementation stage (69%); 24% are in planning stage and only a minority are realized (3%) or already
in operation (3%). To-PED projects (in blue) are mainly in their implementation stage (44%), but also a

implementation status of their projects. Possible choices were: “Planned”, “Implementation Stage”,
“Realized”, “In Operation”, and “n/a”. Percentages of PED and Towards PED projects in different
implementation phases are summarized in Figure 1. Most of PED projects (green) are in their
implementation stage (69%); 24% are in planning stage and only a minority are realized (3%) or
Energies 2020,
13, 6083
4 of 13
already
in operation
(3%). To-PED projects (in blue) are mainly in their implementation stage (44%),
but also a considerable amount of them are already in operation (31%); 9% are realized but not yet in
operation. Only 13% of To-PED projects are in planning stage. As expected, PED projects are less
considerable amount of them are already in operation (31%); 9% are realized but not yet in operation.
mature than Towards PED projects; among them only one project is already in operation and only
Only 13% of To-PED projects are in planning stage. As expected, PED projects are less mature than
one is realized.
Towards PED projects; among them only one project is already in operation and only one is realized.

Figure
Figure 1.
1. Implementation
Implementation status
status of
of Positive
Positive Energy
Energy District
District and
and Neighborhood
Neighborhood (PED)
(PED) versus
versus Toward
Toward
(To)-PED.
(To)-PED.

Building Structure
Structure
3.3. Building
them into
into “Newly
“Newly Built”,
Built”,
Differences of projects’ building structures were analyzed by dividing them
“Existing
“Existing Neighborhood”
Neighborhood” and
and “Mixed”.
“Mixed”.
show
a mixed
typology
(Figure
2); 66%
them
newly
Projects with
withPED
PEDambition
ambitionmainly
mainly
show
a mixed
typology
(Figure
2); of
66%
of combine
them combine
built with
existing
neighborhoods,
28% of them
newlyare
built
districts,
only 7%
developed
newly
built
with existing
neighborhoods,
28% are
of them
newly
built and
districts,
andare
only
7% are
from existing
neighborhoods.
developed
from
existing neighborhoods.

On the contrary, To-PED projects are mainly based on existing neighborhoods (41%). A
considerable percentage of them is based on a mixed typology (38%) and only 16% of Towards PED
projects are newly built. A comparison among PED and Towards PED projects is shown in Figure 2.
PEDs results are in good agreement with the framework, which suggests the combination of
new
urban development areas with existing buildings.
Energies 2020, 13, 6083
5 of 13

Figure 2. Building structure of PED versus To-PED.
Figure 2. Building structure of PED versus To-PED.

3.4.the
Land
Use To-PED projects are mainly based on existing neighborhoods (41%). A considerable
On
contrary,
percentage
of Booklet
them is based
oninformation
a mixed typology
and
only 16%
ofMultiple
Towardschoices
PED projects
are
The
includes
on land(38%)
use of
projects
areas.
were available
newly
built.
A
comparison
among
PED
and
Towards
PED
projects
is
shown
in
Figure
2.
for this topic: “Residential”, “Office”, “Industry”, “Commercial”, “Social”, “Other”, and “n/a”.
PEDsTwenty-three
results are in good
agreement
with projects
the framework,
which
suggests
the
combination
of new in
PED and
17 To-PED
specified
a land
use and
results
are summarized
urbanFigure
development
areas
with existing
3a. All the
projects
(100% ofbuildings.
PED and 100% of To-PED) included residential use. In addition
to residential use, 65% of PED projects included a social land use versus 29% of To-PED projects.
3.4. Land Use
Commercial activities were foreseen in 61% of PED and only in 24% of To-PED projects. More
The
Booklet includes
information
on landfor
useoffice
of projects
choices53%
were
comparable
percentages
were observed
spacesareas.
(61% Multiple
of PED versus
ofavailable
To-PED) and
for this
topic: “Residential”,
“Office”,
“Commercial”,
“Social”,
“Other”,
and
industry
(22% of PED versus
18%“Industry”,
of To-PED).
In addition, 30%
of PED
and 47%
of “n/a”.
To-PED projects
Twenty-three
PEDtypologies
and 17 To-PED
projects
specified
a land
and results
are summarized
mentioned other
of land
use (e.g.,
logistic
hubs,use
natural
facilities,
waste water in
energy
Figure
3a. All systems,
the projects
(100% of PED and 100% of To-PED) included residential use. In addition
recovery
etc.).
to residential use, 65% of PED projects included a social land use versus 29% of To-PED projects.
Commercial activities were foreseen in 61% of PED and only in 24% of To-PED projects. More comparable
percentages were observed for office spaces (61% of PED versus 53% of To-PED) and industry (22% of
PED versus 18% of To-PED). In addition, 30% of PED and 47% of To-PED projects mentioned other
typologies of land use (e.g., logistic hubs, natural facilities, waste water energy recovery systems, etc.).

Comparison results for PED and To-PED projects are summarized in Figure 3b. Only small
percentages of PED and To-PED projects have a single land use. A high percentage of PED and ToPED projects have a moderate mixed land use, namely 57% and 76%, respectively. A significant
amount of PED projects has a highly mixed use (39%), whereas the same is true in only 18% of
Towards
PED projects.
Energies 2020, 13, 6083
6 of 13

Figure
Land
use
PED
versus
To-PED;(b)
(b)land
landuse
useselection
selectionofofPEDs
PEDsversus
versusTo-PED.
To-PED.
Figure
3. 3.
(a)(a)
Land
use
ofof
PED
versus
To-PED;

The number of different land use selections were counted for PED and Towards PED projects.
The results reflect the degree of mixed use in the projects and were divided into three groups:
“single use”, “moderate mixed” (two to four land uses), and “highly mixed” (more than five land uses).
Comparison results for PED and To-PED projects are summarized in Figure 3b. Only small percentages
of PED and To-PED projects have a single land use. A high percentage of PED and To-PED projects
have a moderate mixed land use, namely 57% and 76%, respectively. A significant amount of PED
projects has a highly mixed use (39%), whereas the same is true in only 18% of Towards PED projects.

Energies 2020, 13, 6083

7 of 13

3.5. Energy Typology
The template used so far included a question on “Typology of Energy Supply” where project
representatives could select one or more of the following options: “Solar thermal energy”, “Geothermal
energy”, “District heating/local heating”, “Heat pump system”, “Industrial waste heat”, “Photovoltaic”,
“Other”, and “n/a”.
Answers to this question where collected for PED and To-PED projects and the results in percentage
of total projects with energy data available are shown in Figure 4a. Most of the projects included
“district/local heating” in their energy strategy, with similar percentages for PED (75%) and To-PED
projects (83%). Several projects included “heat pump system”, with 71% of PED and 60% of To-PED
projects. Among PED projects, 71% of them exploited photovoltaic energy, while only 30% of To-PED
projects used PV. The share of PV use represents the main difference between the two project categories,
followed by the use of geothermal energy—58% for PED versus 31% of To-PED. Half of PED use solar
thermal energy versus 37% of To-PED; a similar result for PED and To-PED was observed for industrial
waste heat (25% and 33%, respectively). Other typologies of energy supplies described by the PED
projects included wind, biomass, waste digestion, and hydrothermal.
For each project, we evaluated the number of different typologies of energy supply combined together.
Data obtained were classified in four different groups based on the number of energy sources used:
•
•
•
•

Single (only one)
Moderate mixed (two to three)
Highly mixed (four to five)
Very highly mixed (less than six)

The quantification of multiple energy sources integration for PED and To-PEDs is summarized in
Figure 4b. Half of PED projects use “highly mixed” energy sources (4 or 5), 29% are “moderate mixed”,
13% are “very highly mixed”, and only 8% use just a single source of energy.
Most of To-PED projects are “moderate mixed”; 60% use two or three sources of energy, 30% are
“highly mixed”, 7% use only a single source, and only 3% use “very highly mixed” energy typologies.
Results suggest that PEDs combine more energy sources (four or five) than Towards PED projects
(two or three) to satisfy the energy surplus required. PED projects have the aim of reaching an energy
surplus production from renewable energies. Combining a high number of energies is not the aim for
a PED but it seems to be a frequent approach of PED projects. PED preferred energy typologies are
district and local heating, heat pump systems, photovoltaic, and geothermal energy.
3.6. Success Factors and Challenges of Projects Implementation
An analysis of the statements regarding success factors and challenges/barriers of PED and
To-PED projects (Figures 5 and 6) shows the perceived importance of stakeholder involvement. In fact,
involvement processes (urban stakeholders, citizens) can be seen as defining elements for the success
or failure of a project. Political support (or lack of it), most likely connected with funding, is seen as
another key aspect, especially for PED. Capacity-building among decision-makers can thus be seen as
a highly important task. Not only funding, but the elaboration of feasible business models also ranks
very high among key aspects of PED development.

Energies 2020,
2020,13,
13,6083
x FOR PEER REVIEW
Energies

of 13
13
88 of

Figure 4. (a) Energy typology of PED versus To-PED; (b) energy typology selections of PED versus
Figure 4. (a) Energy typology of PED versus To-PED; (b) energy typology selections of PED versus To-PED.
To-PED.

3.6. Success Factors and Challenges of Projects Implementation
An analysis of the statements regarding success factors and challenges/barriers of PED and ToPED projects (Figures 5 and 6) shows the perceived importance of stakeholder involvement. In fact,
involvement processes (urban stakeholders, citizens) can be seen as defining elements for the success
or failure of a project. Political support (or lack of it), most likely connected with funding, is seen as
another key aspect, especially for PED. Capacity-building among decision-makers can thus be seen

as a highly important task. Not only funding, but the elaboration of feasible business models also
ranks very high among key aspects of PED development.
A big challenge for successful implementation processes are legislation and regulations—an indepth analysis of the particular legal barriers (on either local, national, or European levels) therefore
Energies
13, highly
6083
9 of 13
seems 2020,
to be
relevant in particular for PED. Within the +CityxChange project, possible
strategies to enable regulatory mechanisms have been studied [13].
Success Factors
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Stakeholder involvement
Integrated technology
Funding / business models
Political support
Citizens involvement and support
Pilots > feasibility
Cooperation & support (national-regional-local)
Integrated urban strategies
Location / local RES available
Energy efficiency measures
Refurbishment strategies
City administration & cross-sectoral approach
Public-private-partnership
Land ownership
Definition of system boundaries
Market flexibility
Risk management
Capacity building
Legislation & regulations
Monitoring concept
Transparency & visibility

Energies 2020, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW

11 of 13
PED

Towards PED

with existing governance structures within city administrations and a lack of cross-sectoral
Figure
5.
of
implementation
of
and
projects.
approaches, are often
mentioned
as
main
for inhibited
processes (Figure 6).
Figure
5. Success
Success factors
factors
ofreasons
implementation
of PED
PEDimplementation
and To-PED
To-PED projects.
4. Discussion and Conclusions

Challenges
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

The analysis presented in this report was performed on data included in the first update of the
/ business models
PED Booklet (February Funding
2020).
The aim of this study is to evaluate trends, features, successes, or critical
& regulations
factors that contribute toLegislation
development
of PED projects in Europe.
There is aCitybroad
variety
of projects
addressing energy transition. While only 29 of 61 projects are
administration
& cross-sectoral
approach
planning to implementStakeholder
PEDs,involvement
all of them provide valuable approaches and strategies regarding
actions towards the energy transition in the urban context. Most of the projects classified as Towards
Land ownership
PEDs seem to include the possibility to develop into PEDs in a further step. However, the actual
(Lack of) Political support
feasibility of many project designs is not yet assessable since a large share of the projects listed are in
Integrated technology
planning or early implementation
stages. The PED Reference Framework, with its focus on energy
Risk management
functions and overall sustainability
goals, provides an open framework—the results of the
comparison between PED
projects
and
Towards
PEDs projects indicate that differences between the
Public / citizen opposition
two groups are not categorical
and the main issues and challenges of project implementation are
Pilots > feasibility
similar. This therefore supports the assumption that projects with no self-declared PED ambition may
Capacity building
be further developed to achieve PED status according to the PED Reference Framework. A further
Location / limited local RES
operationalization of the
PED Reference Framework [5], which is currently under development, aims
Refurbishment
strategies
at a common PED definition
that
includes local differences and diverse approaches.
For this analysis it Integrated
must urban
be considered
that not all countries have equally contributed to the Booklet
strategies
yet. The Booklet is based
on
voluntary
contributions
from individual PED-related projects. Therefore,
Definition of system boundaries
the results do not allow any interpretation about the level of PED efforts across Europe in general.
Cooperation & political support (national-regional-local)

PED

Towards PED

Figure
Figure 6.
6. Challenges
Challengesand
andbarriers
barriersfor
forimplementation
implementationof
of PED
PED and
and To-PED
To-PED projects.
projects.

Considering the issues discussed, key areas of action to be further explored can be summarized
as follows:


Allowing for and testing of a diversity of approaches and strategies: exploring room for
experimenting with and implementing of PED Labs; monitoring existing approaches the and
elaboration of guides and tools

Energies 2020, 13, 6083

10 of 13

A big challenge for successful implementation processes are legislation and regulations—an
in-depth analysis of the particular legal barriers (on either local, national, or European levels) therefore
seems to be highly relevant in particular for PED. Within the +CityxChange project, possible strategies
to enable regulatory mechanisms have been studied [13].
4. Discussion and Conclusions
The analysis presented in this report was performed on data included in the first update of the
PED Booklet (February 2020). The aim of this study is to evaluate trends, features, successes, or critical
factors that contribute to development of PED projects in Europe.
There is a broad variety of projects addressing energy transition. While only 29 of 61 projects are
planning to implement PEDs, all of them provide valuable approaches and strategies regarding actions
towards the energy transition in the urban context. Most of the projects classified as Towards PEDs
seem to include the possibility to develop into PEDs in a further step. However, the actual feasibility
of many project designs is not yet assessable since a large share of the projects listed are in planning
or early implementation stages. The PED Reference Framework, with its focus on energy functions
and overall sustainability goals, provides an open framework—the results of the comparison between
PED projects and Towards PEDs projects indicate that differences between the two groups are not
categorical and the main issues and challenges of project implementation are similar. This therefore
supports the assumption that projects with no self-declared PED ambition may be further developed
to achieve PED status according to the PED Reference Framework. A further operationalization of
the PED Reference Framework [5], which is currently under development, aims at a common PED
definition that includes local differences and diverse approaches.
For this analysis it must be considered that not all countries have equally contributed to the
Booklet yet. The Booklet is based on voluntary contributions from individual PED-related projects.
Therefore, the results do not allow any interpretation about the level of PED efforts across Europe
in general.
Nevertheless, these preliminary results highlight the importance of national programs and strong
R&I involvement in the replication of PED strategies, as for example in Norway where ZEN Research
Center on Zero Emission and Neighborhoods in Smart Cities is helping the spreading of pilot projects
in line with the PED framework. Future investigations on the impact of climatic zones on PED
mainstreaming will be also considered.
Projects that declared a PED ambition are mainly in their planning or implementation stage
(93% versus 57% of To-PED). This suggests that most of PED strategies are still to be tested and
optimized and a regular update of the Booklet cases and data analysis is needed. Efforts will continue
to extend the data base, improve data quality, and assess these projects to identify good practice as
well as critical issues at further stages.
Most projects with PED ambitions (66%) combine newly built neighborhoods with existing
neighborhoods. This result is in good agreement with the framework that suggests the combination of
new urban development areas with existing buildings. Only 7% of PED are developed in an existing
neighborhood. The high complexity of a PED project requires deep interventions to fit with the
new paradigm and might inhibit ambitions to apply PED ambitions to existing structures. The need
for dealing with complex ownership structures or technological limitations, for instance regarding
PV-instalment, in connection with other aspects of revitalization, for example, building protections and
preservation of cityscape, are just two factors that need to be mentioned. Regarding the implementation
of a PED ambition, it does not seem to be a common strategy to count only on existing neighborhood.
However, for most European cities, transformation of the existing building stock is a key aspect for
achieving the energy transition. Therefore, exploring, integrating and applying PED solutions and
approaches to the existing urban structure seems to be a crucial challenge in the long run. An 8-step
process to develop a PED is proposed by the JRC report [14].

Energies 2020, 13, 6083

11 of 13

A significant amount of PED projects involves a highly mixed land use (39%) while only 18% of
Towards PED projects do. Multifunctional urban structures can be seen as a basic requirement for
successful PED implementation since they support efficient use of energy and more opportunities
for energy flexibility. A high percentage of PED mentioned commercial and social use of the land.
Multifunctionality is also a crucial requirement for embedding PED strategies in integrated urban
planning strategies aiming at high quality of life and sustainable local development. This is in line
with the framework definition that requires social and economic sustainability.
Another feature of PED is their highly mixed combination of energy typologies. Fifty percent
of PED projects integrate four to five energy sources, whereas 60% of To-PED projects use two or
three. This is a reasonable result given the fact that PED projects have the ambition to have an
annual positive energy balance produced from renewable sources. To satisfy this ambitious aim,
the combination of multiple energy typologies is key to exploit changing energies’ availabilities,
consumptions with different weather conditions, or with the alternation of day and night and seasons.
Photovoltaics is used in 71% of PED projects versus 30% of To-PED projects. Photovoltaics is a mature
and suitable technology for decentralized and renewable energy production. Its profitability is already
reached in some European countries and increasing diffusion in building rooftop is expected [15].
This explains why a high percentage of PEDs rely on photovoltaics solar energy as local production of
renewable energy.
Stakeholders, citizens involvement strategies, integrated technology, and political support are
considered main success factors for PED development. A successful PED implementation requires
collaboration with citizens and final users right from initial planning stages to avoid their opposition
to the change of paradigm that a PED aims to do in terms of social, economic and energy sustainability.
Political support is a necessary factor to activate national programs and new funding opportunities.
Furthermore, the technical complexity of a PED is the reason why integrated technology was mentioned
as a main feature to its success.
The main barrier for a PED is the access to adequate funding and business models (Figure 6).
PEDs are more expensive than traditional projects and they require multiple sources of financing
and advanced business models. Innovations and changes introduced by PED projects require ad hoc
regulations and a dedicated legal framework. This explains why legislation and regulations, together
with existing governance structures within city administrations and a lack of cross-sectoral approaches,
are often mentioned as main reasons for inhibited implementation processes (Figure 6).
Considering the issues discussed, key areas of action to be further explored can be summarized as
follows:
•

•

•

•

•

Allowing for and testing of a diversity of approaches and strategies: exploring room for
experimenting with and implementing of PED Labs; monitoring existing approaches the and
elaboration of guides and tools
Developing fitting governance structures and the legal framework: consideration of Functional
Urban Areas (regional perspective); inter-departmental cooperation within city administrations
and collaboration between city administrations, energy providers, real estate industry, civic society,
and other stakeholders; re-consideration and adaptation of legislation and regulations
Integration of PED strategies in holistic urban planning: mainstreaming of energy planning in
urban planning strategies; connecting energy aspects with climate action; a high quality regard
for functions and design
Developing feasible business models and funding opportunities: creating awareness and political
support for development and implementation of national programs; consideration of different
settings (especially the availability of renewable energy sources) and technological solutions;
exploring job creation and boosting local/regional economy
Exploration of strategies in existing urban structures: combining revitalization and greening
strategies; involving stakeholders with a special focus on landowner and citizen participation

Energies 2020, 13, 6083

12 of 13

Based on these preliminary observations, the next activities will focus on the following aspects:
-

Integration of key findings into PED Program activities
Developing the PED Booklet as strategic tool for the PED Program
Updating the template to collect project descriptions
Updating the PED Booklet with more cases across Europe

Author Contributions: Conceptualization: C.G. and S.B.; methodology: S.B. and C.G.; software: S.B., S.T.,
and C.G.; validation: S.B. and C.G.; formal analysis: S.B. and C.G.; investigation: S.B. and C.G.; resources, S.B. and
C.G.; data curation, S.B. and S.T.; writing—original draft preparation, S.B.; writing—review and editing, C.G.;
visualization, S.B.; supervision, C.G.; project administration, C.G.; funding acquisition, C.G. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank all project representatives who provided data on the projects
presented in the PED Booklet, which served as basis for this analysis. Furthermore, the authors would also like
to acknowledge the support of SET Plan Action 3.2 Italian National Delegate Paola Clerici and the work of the
PED Program Management, specifically Margit Noll, Hans-Günther Schwarz, Robert Hinterberger, and Susanne
Meyer, and the contributions of the PED Program Stakeholders Group, specifically EERA JPSC, regarding overall
conceptualization of the PED Program and the elaboration of the PED Framework, which is a fundamental basis
for the analysis of the data provided.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.

Pichler, P.P.; Zwickel, T.; Chavez, A.; Kretschmer, T.; Seddon, J.; Weisz, H. Reducing Urban Greenhouse Gas
Footprints. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 14659. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sustainable Development Goal 11: Make Cities and Human Settlements Inclusive, Safe, Resilient and
Sustainable. Available online: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg11 (accessed on 5 June 2019).
SET-Plan Action 3.2 on Smart Cities and Communities. Available online: https://setis.ec.europa.eu/system/
files/setplan_smartcities_implementationplan.pdf (accessed on 12 October 2020).
JPI Urban Europe, Positive Energy Districts (PED). Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/ped/
(accessed on 12 October 2020).
Framework Definition for Positive Energy Districts and Neighbourhoods. March 2020. Available
online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/app/uploads/2020/04/White-Paper-PED-Framework-Definition-2020323final.pdf (accessed on 12 October 2020).
Alpagut, B.; Akyürek, Ö.; Mitre, E.M. Positive Energy Districts Methodology and Its Replication Potential.
Proceedings 2019, 20, 8. [CrossRef]
Ahlers, D.; Driscoll, P.; Wibe, H.; Wyckmans, A. Co-Creation of Positive Energy Blocks, 1st Nordic conference
on Zero Emission and Plus Energy Buildings. Earth Environ. Sci. 2019, 352, 012060.
Magrini, A.; Lentini, G.; Cuman, S.; Bodrato, A.; Marenco, L. From nearly zero energy buildings (NZEB) to
positive energy buildings (PEB): The next challenge—The most recent European trends with some notes on
the energy analysis of a forerunner PEB example. Dev. Built Environ. 2020, 3, 100019. [CrossRef]
Europe towards Positive Energy Districts, First Update. Available online: https://jpi-urbaneurope.eu/app/
uploads/2020/03/PED-Booklet-Update-Feb2020_.pdf (accessed on 1 October 2020).
Berker, T.; Woods, R. Identifying and addressing reverse salients in infrastructural change. The case of a
small zero emission campus in Southern Norway. Int. J. Sustain. High. Educ. 2020, 21. [CrossRef]
Cachat, E.T.; Grynning, S.; Thomsen, J.; Selkowitz, S. Responsive building envelope concepts in zero emission
neighborhoods and smart cities—A roadmap to implementation. Build. Environ. 2019, 149, 446–457. [CrossRef]
Backe, S.; Kvellheim, A.K. Zero Emission Neighborhoods—Drivers and Barriers towards Future Development;
ZEN Report 22; NTNU/SINTEF: ZEN, Norway, 2020.
Bertelsen, S.; Livik, K.; Myrstad, M. D2.1 Report on Enabling Regulatory Mechanism to Trial Innovation
in Cities. +CityxChange, Work Package 2, Task 2.1; +Cityxchange, H2020, Grant Agreement No. 824260.
Final delivery date: 31 July 2019.
Shnapp, S.; Paci, D.; Bertoldi, P. Enabling Positive Energy Districts across Europe: Energy Efficiency Couples
Renewable Energy; JRC Technical Report; Publications Office of the European Union: Luxemburg, 2020.

Energies 2020, 13, 6083

15.

13 of 13

Vimpari, J.; Seppo, J. Estimating the diffusion of rooftop PVs: A real estate economics perspective. Energy
2019, 172, 1087–1097. [CrossRef]

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

